That sun which first had warmed my breast with love
had now revealed to me, confuting, proving,
the gentle face of truth, its loveliness;

and I, in order to declare myself
corrected and convinced, lifted my head
as high as my confessional required.

But a new vision showed itself to me;
the grip in which it held me was so fast
that I did not remember to confess.

Just as, returning through transparent, clean
glass, or through waters calm and crystalline
(so shallow that they scarcely can reflect),

the mirrored image of our faces meets
our pupils with no greater force than that
a pearl has when displayed on a white forehead—

so faint, the many faces I saw keen
to speak; thus, my mistake was contrary
to that which led the man to love the fountain.

As soon as I had noticed them, thinking
that what I saw were merely mirrorings,
I turned around to see who they might be;

and I saw nothing; and I let my sight
turn back to meet the light of my dear guide,
who, as she smiled, glowed in her holy eyes.

“There is no need to wonder if I smile,”
she said, “because you reason like a child;
your steps do not yet rest upon the truth;

your mind misguides you into emptiness:
what you are seeing are true substances,
placed here because their vows were not fulfilled.

Thus, speak and listen; trust what they will say:
the truthful light in which they find their peace
will not allow their steps to turn astray.”

Then I turned to the shade that seemed most anxious
to speak, and I began as would a man
bewildered by desire too intense:

“O spirit born to goodness, you who feel,
beneath the rays of the eternal life,
that sweetness which cannot be known unless

it is experienced, it would be gracious
of you to let me know your name and fate.”
At this, unhesitant, with smiling eyes:

“Our charity will never lock its gates
against just will; our love is like the Love
that would have all Its court be like Itself.

Within the world I was a nun, a virgin;
and if your mind attends and recollects,
my greater beauty here will not conceal me,

and you will recognize me as Piccarda,
who, placed here with the other blessed ones,
am blessed within the slowest of the spheres.

Our sentiments, which only serve the flame
that is the pleasure of the Holy Ghost,
delight in their conforming to His order.

And we are to be found within a sphere
this low, because we have neglected vows,
so that in some respect we were deficient.”

And I to her: “Within your wonderful
semblance there is something divine that glows,
transforming the appearance you once showed:

therefore, my recognizing you was slow;
but what you now have told me is of help;
I can identify you much more clearly.

But tell me: though you’re happy here, do you
desire a higher place in order to
see more and to be still more close to Him?”

Together with her fellow shades she smiled
at first; then she replied to me with such
gladness, like one who burns with love’s first flame:

“Brother, the power of love appeases our
will so—we only long for what we have;
we do not thirst for greater blessedness.

Should we desire a higher sphere than ours,
then our desires would be discordant with
the will of Him who has assigned us here,

but you’ll see no such discord in these spheres;
to live in love is—here—necessity,
if you think on love’s nature carefully.

The essence of this blessed life consists
in keeping to the boundaries of God’s will,
through which our wills become one single will;

so that, as we are ranged from step to step
throughout this kingdom, all this kingdom wills
that which will please the King whose will is rule.

And in His will there is our peace: that sea
to which all beings move—the beings He
creates or nature makes—such is His will.”

Then it was clear to me how every place
in Heaven is in Paradise, though grace
does not rain equally from the High Good.

But just as, when our hunger has been sated
with one food, we still long to taste the other—
while thankful for the first, we crave the latter—

so was I in my words and in my gestures,
asking to learn from her what was the web
of which her shuttle had not reached the end.

“A perfect life,” she said, “and her high merit
enheaven, up above, a woman whose
rule governs those who, in your world, would wear

nuns’ dress and veil, so that, until their death,
they wake and sleep with that Spouse who accepts
all vows that love conforms unto His pleasure.

Still young, I fled the world to follow her;
and, in her order’s habit, I enclosed
myself and promised my life to her rule.

Then men more used to malice than to good
took me—violently—from my sweet cloister:
God knows what, after that, my life became.

This other radiance that shows itself
to you at my right hand, a brightness kindled
by all the light that fills our heaven—she

has understood what I have said: she was
a sister, and from her head, too, by force,
the shadow of the sacred veil was taken.

But though she had been turned back to the world
against her will, against all honest practice,
the veil upon her heart was never loosed.

This is the splendor of the great Costanza,
who from the Swabians’ second gust engendered
the one who was their third and final power.”

This said, she then began to sing “Ave
Maria” and, while singing, vanished as
a weighty thing will vanish in deep water.

My sight, which followed her as long as it
was able to, once she was out of view,
returned to where its greater longing lay,

and it was wholly bent on Beatrice;
but she then struck my eyes with so much brightness
that I, at first, could not withstand her force;

and that made me delay my questioning.