Generous will—in which is manifest
always the love that breathes toward righteousness,
as in contorted will is greediness—

imposing silence on that gentle lyre,
brought quiet to the consecrated chords
that Heaven’s right hand slackens and draws taut.

Can souls who prompted me to pray to them,
by falling silent all in unison,
be deaf to men’s just prayers? Then he may grieve

indeed and endlessly—the man who leaves
behind such love and turns instead to seek
things that do not endure eternally.

As, through the pure and tranquil skies of night,
at times a sudden fire shoots, and moves
eyes that were motionless—a fire that seems

a star that shifts its place, except that in
that portion of the heavens where it flared,
nothing is lost, and its own course is short—

so, from the horn that stretches on the right,
down to the foot of that cross, a star ran
out of the constellation glowing there;

nor did that gem desert the cross’s track,
but coursed along the radii, and seemed
just like a flame that alabaster screens.

With such affection did Anchises’ shade
reach out (if we may trust our greatest muse)
when in Elysium he saw his son.

“O blood of mine—o the celestial grace
bestowed beyond all measure—unto whom
as unto you was Heaven’s gate twice opened?”

That light said this; at which, I stared at him.
Then, looking back to see my lady, I,
on this side and on that, was stupefied;

for in the smile that glowed within her eyes,
I thought that I—with mine—had touched the height
of both my blessedness and paradise.

Then—and he was a joy to hear and see—
that spirit added to his first words things
that were too deep to meet my understanding.

Not that he chose to hide his sense from me;
necessity compelled him; he conceived
beyond the mark a mortal mind can reach.

And when his bow of burning sympathy
was slack enough to let his speech descend
to meet the limit of our intellect,

these were the first words where I caught the sense:
“Blessed be you, both Three and One, who show
such favor to my seed.” And he continued:

“The long and happy hungering I drew
from reading that great volume where both black
and white are never changed, you—son—have now

appeased within this light in which I speak
to you; for this, I owe my gratitude
to her who gave you wings for your high flight.

You think your thoughts flow into me from Him
who is the First—as from the number one,
the five and six derive, if one is known—

and so you do not ask me who I am
and why I seem more joyous to you than
all other spirits in this festive throng.

Your thought is true, for both the small and great
of this life gaze into that mirror where,
before you think, your thoughts have been displayed.

But that the sacred love in which I keep
my vigil with unending watchfulness,
the love that makes me thirst with sweet desire,

be better satisfied, let your voice—bold,
assured, and glad—proclaim your will and longing,
to which my answer is decreed already.”

I turned to Beatrice, but she heard me
before I spoke; her smile to me was signal
that made the wings of my desire grow.

Then I began: “As soon as you beheld
the First Equality, both intellect
and love weighed equally for each of you,

because the Sun that brought you light and heat
possesses heat and light so equally
that no thing matches His equality;

whereas in mortals, word and sentiment—
to you, the cause of this is evident—
are wings whose featherings are disparate.

I—mortal—feel this inequality;
thus, it is only with my heart that I
can offer thanks for your paternal greeting

Indeed I do beseech you, living topaz,
set in this precious jewel as a gem:
fulfill my longing—let me know your name.”

“O you, my branch in whom I took delight
even awaiting you, I am your root,”
so he, in his reply to me, began,

then said:”The man who gave your family
its name, who for a century and more
has circled the first ledge of Purgatory,

was son to me and was your great—grandfather;
it is indeed appropriate for you
to shorten his long toil with your good works.

Florence, within her ancient ring of walls—
that ring from which she still draws tierce and nones—
sober and chaste, lived in tranquillity.

No necklace and no coronal were there,
and no embroidered gowns; there was no girdle
that caught the eye more than the one who wore it.

No daughter’s birth brought fear unto her father,
for age and dowry then did not imbalance—
to this side and to that—the proper measure.

There were no families that bore no children;
and Sardanapalus was still a stranger—
not come as yet to teach in the bedchamber.

Not yet had your Uccellatoio’s rise
outdone the rise of Monte Mario,
which, too, will be outdone in its decline.

I saw Bellincione Berti girt
with leather and with bone, and saw his wife
come from her mirror with her face unpainted.

I saw dei Nerli and del Vecchio
content to wear their suits of unlined skins,
and saw their wives at spindle and at spool.

O happy wives! Each one was sure of her
own burial place, and none—for France’s sake—
as yet was left deserted in her bed.

One woman watched with loving care the cradle
and, as she soothed her infant, used the way
of speech with which fathers and mothers play;

another, as she drew threads from the distaff,
would tell, among her household, tales of Trojans,
and tales of Fiesole, and tales of Rome.

A Lapo Salterello, a Cianghella,
would then have stirred as much dismay as now
a Cincinnatus and Cornelia would.

To such a life—so tranquil and so lovely—
of citizens in true community,
into so sweet a dwelling place did Mary,

invoked in pains of birth, deliver me;
and I, within your ancient Baptistery,
at once became Christian and Cacciaguida.

Moronto was my brother, and Eliseo;
my wife came from the valley of the Po—
the surname that you bear was brought by her.

In later years I served the Emperor
Conrad—and my good works so gained his favor
that he gave me the girdle of his knighthood.

I followed him to war against the evil
of that law whose adherents have usurped—
this, through your Pastors’ fault—your just possessions.

There, by that execrable race, I was
set free from fetters of the erring world,
the love of which defiles so many souls.

From martyrdom I came unto this peace.”