The handsome image those united souls,
happy within their blessedness, were shaping,
appeared before me now with open wings.

Each soul seemed like a ruby—one in which
a ray of sun burned so, that in my eyes,
it was the total sun that seemed reflected.

And what I now must tell has never been
reported by a voice, inscribed by ink,
never conceived by the imagination;

for I did see the beak, did hear it speak
and utter with its voice both I and mine
when we and ours were what, in thought, was meant.

And it began: “Because I was both just
and merciful, I am exalted here
to glory no desire can surpass;

the memory I left on earth is such
that even the malicious praise it there,
although they do not follow its example.”

Thus one sole warmth is felt from many embers,
even as from a multitude of loves
one voice alone rose from the Eagle’s image.

To which I said: “O everlasting flowers
of the eternal gladness, who make all
your fragrances appear to me as one,

do let your breath deliver me from that
great fast which kept me hungering so long,
not finding any food for it on earth.

I know indeed that, though God’s Justice has
another realm in Heaven as Its mirror,
you here do not perceive it through a veil.

You know how keenly I prepare myself
to listen, and you know what is that doubt
which caused so old a hungering in me.”

Just like a falcon set free from its hood,
which moves its head and flaps its wings, displaying
its eagerness and proud appearance, so

I saw that ensign do, that Eagle woven
of praises of God’s grace, accompanied
by songs whose sense those up above enjoy.

Then it began: “The One who turned His compass
to mark the world’s confines, and in them set
so many things concealed and things revealed,

could not imprint His Power into all
the universe without His Word remaining
in infinite excess of such a vessel.

In proof of this, the first proud being, he
who was the highest of all creatures, fell—
unripe because he did not wait for light.

Thus it is clear that every lesser nature
is—all the more—too meager a container
for endless Good, which is Its own sole measure.

In consequence of this, your vision—which
must be a ray of that Intelligence
with which all beings are infused—cannot

of its own nature find sufficient force
to see into its origin beyond
what God himself makes manifest to man;

therefore, the vision that your world receives
can penetrate into Eternal Justice
no more than eye can penetrate the sea;

for though, near shore, sight reaches the sea floor,
you cannot reach it in the open sea;
yet it is there, but hidden by the deep.

Only the light that shines from the clear heaven
can never be obscured—all else is darkness
or shadow of the flesh or fleshly poison.

Now is the hiding place of living Justice
laid open to you—where it had been hidden
while you addressed it with insistent questions.

For you would say: ‘A man is born along
the shoreline of the Indus River; none
is there to speak or teach or write of Christ.

And he, as far as human reason sees,
in all he seeks and all he does is good:
there is no sin within his life or speech.

And that man dies unbaptized, without faith.
Where is this justice then that would condemn him?
Where is his sin if he does not believe?’

Now who are you to sit upon the bench,
to judge events a thousand miles away,
when your own vision spans so brief a space?

Of course, for him who would be subtle with me,
were there no Scriptures to instruct you, then
there would be place for an array of questions.

O earthly animals, o minds obtuse!
The Primal Will, which of Itself is good,
from the Supreme Good—Its Self—never moved.

So much is just as does accord with It;
and so, created good can draw It to
itself—but It, rayed forth, causes such goods.”

Just as, above the nest, the stork will circle
when she has fed her fledglings, and as he
whom she has fed looks up at her, so did

the blessed image do, and so did I,
the fledgling, while the Eagle moved its wings,
spurred on by many wills in unison.

Wheeling, the Eagle sang, then said: “Even
as are my songs to you—past understanding—
such is Eternal Judgment to you mortals.”

After the Holy Ghost’s bright flames fell silent
while still within the sign that made the Romans
revered throughout the world, again the Eagle

began: “No one without belief in Christ
has ever risen to this kingdom—either
before or after He was crucified.

But there are many who now cry ‘Christ! Christ!’
who at the Final Judgment shall be far
less close to Him than one who knows not Christ;

the Ethiopian will shame such Christians
when the two companies are separated,
the one forever rich, the other poor.

What shall the Persians, when they come to see
that open volume in which they shall read
the misdeeds of your rulers, say to them?

There one shall see, among the deeds of Albert,
that which is soon to set the pen in motion,
his making of a desert of Prague’s kingdom.

There one shall see the grief inflicted on
the Seine by him who falsifies his coins,
one who shall die beneath a wild boar’s blow.

There one shall see the thirst of arrogance
that drives the Scot and Englishman insane—
unable to remain within their borders.

That book will show the life of Lechery
and ease the Spaniard led—and the Bohemian,
who never knew and never wished for valor.

That book will show the Cripple of Jerusalem—
his good deeds labeled with an I alone,
whereas his evils will be under M.

That book will show the greed and cowardice
of him who oversees the Isle of Fire,
on which Anchises ended his long life;

and to make plain his paltriness, the letters
that register his deeds will be contracted,
to note much pettiness in little space.

And all shall see the filthiness of both
his uncle and his brother, who dishonored
a family so famous—and two crowns.

And he of Portugal and he of Norway
shall be known in that book, and he of Rascia,
who saw—unluckily—the coin of Venice.

O happy Hungary, if she would let
herself be wronged no more! Happy Navarre,
if mountains that surround her served as armor!

And if Navarre needs token of her future,
now Nicosia and Famagosta offer—
as men must see—lament and anger over

their own beast, with his place beside the others.”