While I, with blinded eyes, was apprehensive,
from that bright flame which had consumed my vision,
there breathed a voice that centered my attention,

saying: “Until you have retrieved the power
of sight, which you consumed in me, it would
be best to compensate by colloquy.

Then do begin; declare the aim on which
your soul is set—and be assured of this:
your vision, though confounded, is not dead,

because the woman who conducts you through
this godly region has, within her gaze,
that force the hand of Ananias had.”

I said: “As pleases her, may solace—sooner
or later—reach these eyes, her gates when she
brought me the fire with which I always burn.

The good with which this court is satisfied
is Alpha and Omega of all writings
that Love has—loud or low—read out to me.”

It was the very voice that had dispelled
the fear I felt at sudden dazzlement,
that now, with further words, made me concerned

to speak again. He said: “You certainly
must sift with a still finer sieve, must tell
who led your bow to aim at such a target.”

And I: “By philosophic arguments
and by authority whose source is here,
that love must be imprinted in me; for

the good, once it is understood as such,
enkindles love; and in accord with more
goodness comes greater love. And thus the mind

of anyone who can discern the truth
on which this proof is founded must be moved
to love, more than it loves all else, that Essence

which is preeminent (since any good
that lies outside of It is nothing but
a ray reflected from Its radiance).

My mind discerns this truth, made plain by him
who demonstrates to me that the first love
of the eternal beings is their Maker.

The voice of the true Author states this, too,
where He tells Moses, speaking of Himself:
‘I shall show you all goodness.’ You reveal

this, too, when you begin your high Evangel,
which more than any other proclamation
cries out to earth the mystery of Heaven.”

I heard: “Through human reasoning and through
authorities according with it, you
conclude: your highest love is bent on God.

But tell me, too, if you feel other cords
draw you toward Him, so that you voice aloud
all of the teeth by which this love grips you.”

The holy intent of Christ’s Eagle was
not hidden; I indeed was made aware
of what he would most have my words declare.

Thus I began again: “My charity
results from all those things whose bite can bring
the heart to turn to God; the world’s existence

and mine, the death that He sustained that I
might live, and that which is the hope of all
believers, as it is my hope, together

with living knowledge I have spoken of—
these drew me from the sea of twisted love
and set me on the shore of the right love.

The leaves enleaving all the garden of
the Everlasting Gardener, I love
according to the good He gave to them.”

As soon as I was still, a song most sweet
resounded through that heaven, and my lady
said with the others: “Holy, holy, holy!”

And just as a sharp light will startle us
from sleep because the spirit of eyesight
races to meet the brightness that proceeds

from layer to layer in the eye, and he
who wakens is confused by what he sees,
awaking suddenly, and knows no thing

until his judgment helps him; even so
did Beatrice dispel, with her eyes’ rays,
which shone more than a thousand miles, the chaff

from my eyes: I saw better than I had
before; and as if stupefied, I asked
about the fourth light that I saw among us.

My lady answered: “In those rays there gazes
with love for his Creator the first soul
ever created by the Primal Force.”

As does a tree that bends its crown because
of winds that gust, and then springs up, raised by
its own sustaining power, so did I

while she was speaking. I, bewildered, then
restored to confidence by that desire
to speak with which I was inflamed, began:

“O fruit that was the only one to be
brought forth already ripe, o ancient father
to whom each bride is as a daughter and

daughter-in-law, devoutly as I can,
I do beseech you: speak with me. You see
my wish; to hear you sooner, I do not

declare it.” And the primal soul—much as
an animal beneath a cover stirs,
so that its feelings are made evident

when what enfolds it follows all its movements—
showed me, through that which covered him, with what
rejoicing he was coming to delight me.

Then he breathed forth: “Though you do not declare
your wish, I can perceive it better than
you can perceive the things you hold most certain;

for I can see it in the Truthful Mirror
that perfectly reflects all else, while no
thing can reflect that Mirror perfectly.

You wish to hear how long it is since I
was placed by God in that high garden where
this lady readied you to climb a stair

so long, and just how long it pleased my eyes,
and the true cause of the great anger, and
what idiom I used and shaped. My son,

the cause of my long exile did not lie
within the act of tasting of the tree,
but solely in my trespass of the boundary.

During four thousand three hundred and two
re—turnings of the sun, while I was in
that place from which your Lady sent you Virgil,

I longed for this assembly. While on earth,
I saw the sun return to all the lights
along its way, nine hundred thirty times.

The tongue I spoke was all extinct before
the men of Nimrod set their minds upon
the unaccomplishable task; for never

has any thing produced by human reason
been everlasting—following the heavens,
men seek the new, they shift their predilections.

That man should speak at all is nature’s act,
but how you speak—in this tongue or in that—
she leaves to you and to your preference.

Before I was sent down to Hell’s torments,
on earth, the Highest Good—from which derives
the joy that now enfolds me—was called I;

and then He was called El. Such change must be:
the ways that mortals take are as the leaves
upon a branch—one comes, another goes.

On that peak rising highest from the sea,
my life—first pure, then tainted—lasted from
the first hour to the hour that follows on

the sixth, when the sun shifts to a new quadrant.