Perhaps six thousand miles away from us,
the sixth hour burns, and now our world inclines
its shadow to an almost level bed,

so that the span of heaven high above
begins to alter so, that some stars are
no longer to be seen from our deep earth;

and as the brightest handmaid of the sun
advances, heaven shuts off, one by one,
its lights, until the loveliest is gone.

So did the triumph that forever plays
around the Point that overcame me (Point
that seems enclosed by that which It encloses)

fade gradually from my sight, so that
my seeing nothing else—and love—compelled
my eyes to turn again to Beatrice.

If that which has been said of her so far
were all contained within a single praise,
it would be much too scant to serve me now.

The loveliness I saw surpassed not only
our human measure—and I think that, surely,
only its Maker can enjoy it fully.

I yield: I am defeated at this passage
more than a comic or a tragic poet
has ever been by a barrier in his theme;

for like the sun that strikes the frailest eyes,
so does the memory of her sweet smile
deprive me of the use of my own mind.

From that first day when, in this life, I saw
her face, until I had this vision, no
thing ever cut the sequence of my song,

but now I must desist from this pursuit,
in verses, of her loveliness, just as
each artist who has reached his limit must.

So she, in beauty (as I leave her to
a herald that is greater than my trumpet,
which nears the end of its hard theme), with voice

and bearing of a guide whose work is done,
began again: “From matter’s largest sphere,
we now have reached the heaven of pure light,

light of the intellect, light filled with love,
love of true good, love filled with happiness,
a happiness surpassing every sweetness.

Here you will see both ranks of Paradise
and see one of them wearing that same aspect
which you will see again at Judgment Day.”

Like sudden lightning scattering the spirits
of sight so that the eye is then too weak
to act on other things it would perceive,

such was the living light encircling me,
leaving me so enveloped by its veil
of radiance that I could see no thing.

“The Love that calms this heaven always welcomes
into Itself with such a salutation,
to make the candle ready for its flame.”

No sooner had these few words entered me
than I became aware that I was rising
beyond the power that was mine; and such

new vision kindled me again, that even
the purest light would not have been so bright
as to defeat my eyes, deny my sight;

and I saw light that took a river’s form—
light flashing, reddish—gold, between two banks
painted with wonderful spring flowerings.

Out of that stream there issued living sparks,
which settled on the flowers on all sides,
like rubies set in gold; and then, as if

intoxicated with the odors, they
again plunged into the amazing flood:
as one spark sank, another spark emerged.

“The high desire that now inflames, incites,
you to grasp mentally the things you see,
pleases me more as it swells more; but first,

that you may satisfy your mighty thirst,
you must drink of these waters.” So did she
who is the sun of my eyes speak to me.

She added this: “The river and the gems
of topaz entering and leaving, and
the grasses’ laughter—these are shadowy

prefaces of their truth; not that these things
are lacking in themselves; the defect lies
in you, whose sight is not yet that sublime.”

No infant who awakes long after his
usual hour would turn his face toward milk
as quickly as I hurried toward that stream;

to make still finer mirrors of my eyes,
I bent down toward the waters which flow there
that we, in them, may find our betterment.

But as my eyelids’ eaves drank of that wave,
it seemed to me that it had changed its shape:
no longer straight, that flow now formed a round.

Then, just as maskers, when they set aside
the borrowed likenesses in which they hide,
seem to be other than they were before,

so were the flowers and the sparks transformed,
changing to such festivity before me
that I saw—clearly—both of Heaven’s courts.

O radiance of God, through which I saw
the noble triumph of the true realm, give
to me the power to speak of what I saw!

Above, on high, there is a light that makes
apparent the Creator to the creature
whose only peace lies in his seeing Him.

The shape which that light takes as it expands
is circular, and its circumference
would be too great a girdle for the sun.

All that one sees of it derives from one
light—ray reflected from the summit of
the Primum Mobile, which from it draws

power and life. And as a hill is mirrored
in waters at its base, as if to see
itself—when rich with grass and flowers—graced,

so, in a thousand tiers that towered above
the light, encircling it, I saw, mirrored,
all of us who have won return above.

And if the lowest rank ingathers such
vast light, then what must be the measure of
this Rose where it has reached its highest leaves!

Within that breadth and height I did not find
my vision gone astray, for it took in
that joy in all its quality and kind.

There, near and far do not subtract or add;
for where God governs with no mediator,
no thing depends upon the laws of nature.

Into the yellow of the eternal Rose
that slopes and stretches and diffuses fragrance
of praise unto the Sun of endless spring,

now Beatrice drew me as one who, though
he would speak out, is silent. And she said:
“See how great is this council of white robes!

See how much space our city’s circuit spans!
See how our seated ranks are now so full
that little room is left for any more!

And in that seat on which your eyes are fixed
because a crown already waits above it,
before you join this wedding feast, shall sit

the soul of noble Henry, he who is,
on earth, to be imperial; he shall
show Italy the righteous way—but when

she is unready. The blind greediness
bewitching you, has made you like the child
who dies of hunger and drives off his nurse.

And in the holy forum such shall be
the Prefect then, that either openly
or secretly he will not walk with Henry.

But God will not endure him long within
the holy ministry: he shall be cast
down there, where Simon Magus pays; he shall

force the Anagnine deeper in his hole.”