By now the sun was crossing the horizon
of the meridian whose highest point
covers Jerusalem; and from the Ganges,

night, circling opposite the sun, was moving
together with the Scales that, when the length
of dark defeats the day, desert night’s hands;

so that, above the shore that I had reached,
the fair Aurora’s white and scarlet cheeks
were, as Aurora aged, becoming orange.

We still were by the sea, like those who think
about the journey they will undertake,
who go in heart but in the body stay.

And just as Mars, when it is overcome
by the invading mists of dawn, glows red
above the waters’ plain, low in the west,

so there appeared to me—and may I see it
again—a light that crossed the sea: so swift,
there is no flight of bird to equal it.

When, for a moment, I’d withdrawn my eyes
that I might ask a question of my guide,
I saw that light again, larger, more bright.

Then, to each side of it, I saw a whiteness,
though I did not know what that whiteness was;
below, another whiteness slowly showed.

My master did not say a word before
the whitenesses first seen appeared as wings;
but then, when he had recognized the helmsman,

he cried: “Bend, bend your knees: behold the angel
of God, and join your hands; from this point on,
this is the kind of minister you’ll meet.

See how much scorn he has for human means;
he’d have no other sail than his own wings
and use no oar between such distant shores.

See how he holds his wings, pointing to Heaven,
piercing the air with his eternal pinions,
which do not change as mortal plumage does.”

Then he—that bird divine—as he drew closer
and closer to us, seemed to gain in brightness,
so that my eyes could not endure his nearness,

and I was forced to lower them; and he
came on to shore with boat so light, so quick
that nowhere did the water swallow it.

The helmsman sent from Heaven, at the stern,
seemed to have blessedness inscribed upon him;
more than a hundred spirits sat within.

“In exitu Israel de Aegypto,”
with what is written after of that psalm,
all of those spirits sang as with one voice.

Then over them he made the holy cross
as sign; they flung themselves down on the shore,
and he moved off as he had come—swiftly.

The crowd that he had left along the beach
seemed not to know the place; they looked about
like those whose eyes try out things new to them.

Upon all sides the sun shot forth the day;
and from mid—heaven its incisive arrows
already had chased Capricorn away,

when those who’d just arrived lifted their heads
toward us and said: “Do show us, if you know,
the way by which we can ascend this slope.”

And Virgil answered: “You may be convinced
that we are quite familiar with this shore;
but we are strangers here, just as you are;

we came but now, a little while before you,
though by another path, so difficult
and dense that this ascent seems sport to us.”

The souls who, noticing my breathing, sensed
that I was still a living being, then,
out of astonishment, turned pale; and just

as people crowd around a messenger
who bears an olive branch, to hear his news,
and no one hesitates to join that crush,

so here those happy spirits—all of them—
stared hard at my face, just as if they had
forgotten to proceed to their perfection.

I saw one of those spirits moving forward
in order to embrace me—his affection
so great that I was moved to mime his welcome.

O shades—in all except appearance—empty!
Three times I clasped my hands behind him and
as often brought them back against my chest.

Dismay, I think, was painted on my face;
at this, that shadow smiled as he withdrew;
and I, still seeking him, again advanced.

Gently, he said that I could now stand back;
then I knew who he was, and I beseeched
him to remain awhile and talk with me.

He answered: “As I loved you when I was
within my mortal flesh, so, freed, I love you:
therefore I stay. But you, why do you journey?”

“My own Casella, to return again
to where I am, I journey thus; but why,”
I said, “were you deprived of so much time?”

And he: “No injury is done to me
if he who takes up whom—and when—he pleases
has kept me from this crossing many times,

for his own will derives from a just will.
And yet, for three months now, he has accepted,
most tranquilly, all those who would embark.

Therefore, I, who had turned then to the shore
at which the Tiber’s waters mix with salt,
was gathered in by his benevolence.

Straight to that river mouth, he set his wings:
that always is the place of gathering
for those who do not sink to Acheron.”

And I: “If there’s no new law that denies
you memory or practice of the songs
of love that used to quiet all my longings,

then may it please you with those songs to solace
my soul somewhat; for—having journeyed here
together with my body—it is weary.”

“Love that discourses to me in my mind”
he then began to sing—and sang so sweetly
that I still hear that sweetness sound in me.

My master, I, and all that company
around the singer seemed so satisfied,
as if no other thing might touch our minds.

We all were motionless and fixed upon
the notes, when all at once the grave old man
cried out: “What have we here, you laggard spirits?

What negligence, what lingering is this?
Quick, to the mountain to cast off the slough
that will not let you see God show Himself!”

Even as doves, assembled where they feed,
quietly gathering their grain or weeds,
forgetful of their customary strut,

will, if some thing appears that makes them fear,
immediately leave their food behind
because they are assailed by greater care;

so did I see that new—come company—
they left the song behind, turned toward the slope,
like those who go and yet do not know where.

And we were no less hasty in departure.