But while their sudden flight was scattering
those souls across the plain and toward the mountain
where we are racked by rightful punishments,

I drew in closer to my true companion.
For how could I have run ahead without him?
Who could have helped me as I climbed the mountain?

He seemed like one who’s stung by self—reproof;
o pure and noble conscience, you in whom
each petty fault becomes a harsh rebuke!

And when his feet had left off hurrying—
for haste denies all acts their dignity—
my mind, which was—before—too focused, grew

more curious and widened its attention;
I set my vision toward the slope that rises
most steeply, up to heaven from the sea.

Behind my back the sun was flaming red;
but there, ahead of me, its light was shattered
because its rays were resting on my body.

And when I saw the ground was dark in front
of me and me alone, afraid that I
had been abandoned, I turned to my side;

and he, my only comfort, as he turned
around, began: “Why must you still mistrust?
Don’t you believe that I am with—and guide—you?

The body from within which I cast shadows
is buried where it now is evening: taken
from Brindisi, it now belongs to Naples.

Thus, if no shadow falls in front of me,
do not be more amazed than when you see
the heavens not impede each other’s rays.

The Power has disposed such bodiless
bodies to suffer torments, heat and cold;
how this is done, He would not have us know.

Foolish is he who hopes our intellect
can reach the end of that unending road
only one Substance in three Persons follows.

Confine yourselves, o humans, to the quia;
had you been able to see all, there would
have been no need for Mary to give birth.

You saw the fruitless longing of those men
who would—if reason could—have been content,
those whose desire eternally laments:

I speak of Aristotle and of Plato—
and many others.” Here he bent his head
and said no more, remaining with his sorrow.

By this time we had reached the mountain’s base,
discovering a wall of rock so sheer
that even agile legs are useless there.

The loneliest, most jagged promontory
that lies between Turbia and Lerici,
compared with it, provides stairs wide and easy.

“Now who knows where, along this mountainside,”
my master, halting, asked, “one finds a rise
where even he who has no wings can climb?”

While he, his eyes upon the ground, consulted
his mind, considering what road to take,
and I looked up around the wall of rock,

along the left a band of souls appeared
to me to be approaching us—but so
unhurriedly, their movements did not show.

“Lift up your eyes,” I told my master; “here
are those who can advise us how to go,
if you can find no counsel in yourself.”

At this, he looked at them and, less distressed,
replied: “Let us go there; their steps are slow;
and you, my gentle son, hold fast to hope.”

The distance from that company to us—
I mean when we had gone a thousand paces—
was still as far as a fine hurler’s toss,

when they all huddled toward the hard rock wall
and, once they’d crowded there, refused to budge,
even as men, when apprehensive, halt.

“O chosen souls, you who have ended well,”
Virgil began, “by virtue of that peace
which I believe awaits you all, please tell

us where the slope inclines and can be climbed;
for he who best discerns the worth of time
is most distressed whenever time is lost.”

Even as sheep that move, first one, then two,
then three, out of the fold—the others also
stand, eyes and muzzles lowered, timidly;

and what the first sheep does, the others do,
and if it halts, they huddle close behind,
simple and quiet and not knowing why:

so, then, I saw those spirits in the front
of that flock favored by good fortune move—
their looks were modest; seemly, slow, their walk.

As soon as these souls saw, upon my right,
along the ground, a gap in the sun’s light,
where shadow stretched from me to the rock wall,

they stopped and then drew back somewhat; and all
who came behind them—though they did not know
why those ahead had halted—also slowed.

“Without your asking, I shall tell you plainly
that you are looking at a human body;
that’s why the sunlight on the ground is broken.

Don’t be astonished; rest assured that he
would not attempt to cross this wall without
a force that Heaven sent him as support.”

These were my master’s words. That worthy band
replied: “Come back, and move in our direction,”
and gestured—with backhanded motions—right.

And one of them began: “Whoever you
may be, as you move forward, turn and see:
consider if—beyond—you’ve ever seen me.”

I turned to look at him attentively:
he was fair—haired and handsome and his aspect
was noble—but one eyebrow had been cleft

by a swordstroke. When I had humbly noted
that I had never seen him, he said: “Look
now”—showing me a wound high on his chest.

Then, as he smiled, he told me: “I am Manfred,
the grandson of the Empress Constance; thus,
I pray that, when you reach the world again,

you may go to my lovely daughter, mother
of kings of Sicily and Aragon—
tell her the truth, lest she’s heard something other.

After my body had been shattered by
two fatal blows, in tears, I then consigned
myself to Him who willingly forgives.

My sins were ghastly, but the Infinite
Goodness has arms so wide that It accepts
who ever would return, imploring It.

And if Cosenza’s pastor, who was sent
to hunt me down—alive or dead—by Clement,
had understood this facet of God’s mercy,

my body’s bones would still be there—beneath
the custody of the great heap of stones—
near Benevento, at the bridgehead; now

rain bathes my bones, the wind has driven them
beyond the Kingdom, near the Verde’s banks,
where he transported them with tapers spent.

Despite the Church’s curse, there is no one
so lost that the eternal love cannot
return—as long as hope shows something green.

But it is true that anyone who dies
in contumacy of the Holy Church,
though he repented at the end, must wait

along this shore for thirty times the span
he spent in his presumptuousness, unless
that edict is abridged through fitting prayers.

Now see if you, by making known to my
kind Constance where you saw my soul and why
delay’s decreed for me, can make me happy;

those here—through those beyond— advance more quickly.”