I had already left those shades behind
and followed in the footsteps of my guide
when, there beneath me, pointing at me, one

shade shouted: “See the second climber climb:
the sun seems not to shine on his left side
and when he walks, he walks like one alive!”

When I had heard these words, I turned my eyes
and saw the shades astonished as they stared
at me—at me, and at the broken light.

“Why have you let your mind get so entwined,”
my master said, “that you have slowed your walk?
Why should you care about what’s whispered here?

Come, follow me, and let these people talk:
stand like a sturdy tower that does not shake
its summit though the winds may blast; always

the man in whom thought thrusts ahead of thought
allows the goal he’s set to move far off—
the force of one thought saps the other’s force.”

Could my reply be other than “I come”?
And—somewhat colored by the hue that makes
one sometimes merit grace—I spoke those words.

Meanwhile, along the slope, crossing our road
slightly ahead of us, people approached,
singing the Miserere verse by verse.

When they became aware that I allowed
no path for rays of light to cross my body,
they changed their song into a long, hoarse “Oh!”

And two of them, serving as messengers,
hurried to meet us, and those two inquired:
“Please tell us something more of what you are.”

My master answered them: “You can return
and carry this report to those who sent you:
in truth, the body of this man is flesh.

If, as I think, they stopped to see his shadow,
that answer is sufficient: let them welcome
him graciously, and that may profit them.”

Never did I see kindled vapors rend
clear skies at nightfall or the setting sun
cleave August clouds with a rapidity

that matched the time it took those two to speed
above; and, there arrived, they with the others
wheeled back, like ranks that run without a rein.

“These people pressing in on us are many;
they come beseeching you,” the poet said;
“don’t stop, but listen as you move ahead.”

“O soul who make your way to gladness with
the limbs you had at birth, do stay your steps
awhile,” they clamored as they came, “to see

if there is any of us whom you knew,
that you may carry word of him beyond.
Why do you hurry on? Why don’t you stop?

We all were done to death by violence,
and we all sinned until our final hour;
then light from Heaven granted understanding,

so that, repenting and forgiving, we
came forth from life at peace with God, and He
instilled in us the longing to see Him.”

And I: “Although I scrutinize your faces,
I recognize no one; but, spirits born
to goodness, if there’s anything within

my power that might please you, then—by that
same peace which in the steps of such a guide
I seek from world to world—I shall perform it.”

And one began: “We all have faith in your
good offices without your oath, as long
as lack of power does not curb your will.

Thus I, who speak alone—before the others—
beseech you, if you ever see the land
that lies between Romagna and the realm

of Charles, that you be courteous to me,
entreating those in Fano to bestow
fair prayers to purge me of my heavy sins.

My home was Fano; but the piercing wounds
from which there poured the blood where my life lived—
those I received among Antenor’s sons,

there where I thought that I was most secure;
for he of Este, hating me far more
than justice warranted, had that deed done.

But had I fled instead toward Mira when
they overtook me at Oriaco, then
I should still be beyond, where men draw breath.

I hurried to the marsh. The mud, the reeds
entangled me; I fell. And there I saw
a pool, poured from my veins, form on the ground.”

Another shade then said: “Ah, so may that
desire which draws you up the lofty mountain
be granted, with kind pity help my longing!

I was from Montefeltro, I’m Buonconte;
Giovanna and the rest—they all neglect me;
therefore, among these shades, I go in sadness.”

And I to him: “What violence or chance
so dragged you from the field of Campaldino
that we know nothing of your burial place?”

“Oh,” he replied, “across the Casentino
there runs a stream called Archiano—born
in the Apennines above the Hermitage.

There, at the place where that stream’s name is lost,
I came—my throat was pierced—fleeing on foot
and bloodying the plain; and there it was

that I lost sight and speech; and there, as I
had finished uttering the name of Mary,
I fell; and there my flesh alone remained.

I’ll speak the truth—do you, among the living,
retell it: I was taken by God’s angel,
but he from Hell cried: ‘You from Heaven—why

do you deny me him? For just one tear
you carry off his deathless part; but I
shall treat his other part in other wise.’

You are aware how, in the air, moist vapor
will gather and again revert to rain
as soon as it has climbed where cold enfolds.

His evil will, which only seeks out evil,
conjoined with intellect; and with the power
his nature grants, he stirred up wind and vapor.

And then, when day was done, he filled the valley
from Pratomagno far as the great ridge
with mist; the sky above was saturated.

The dense air was converted into water;
rain fell, and then the gullies had to carry
whatever water earth could not receive;

and when that rain was gathered into torrents,
it rushed so swiftly toward the royal river
that nothing could contain its turbulence.

The angry Archiano—at its mouth—
had found my frozen body; and it thrust
it in the Arno and set loose the cross

that, on my chest, my arms, in pain, had formed.
It rolled me on the banks and river bed,
then covered, girded me with its debris.”

“Pray, after your returning to the world,
when, after your long journeying, you’ve rested,”
the third soul, following the second, said,

“may you remember me, who am La Pia;
Siena made—Maremma unmade—me:
he who, when we were wed, gave me his pledge

and then, as nuptial ring, his gem, knows that.”