It was the hour that turns seafarers’ longings
homeward—the hour that makes their hearts grow tender
upon the day they bid sweet friends farewell;

the hour that pierces the new traveler
with love when he has heard, far off, the bell
that seems to mourn the dying of the day;

when I began to let my hearing fade
and watched one of those souls who, having risen,
had signaled with his hand for our attention.

He joined his palms and, lifting them, he fixed
all his attention on the east, as if
to say to God: “I care for nothing else.”

“Te lucis ante” issued from his lips
with such devotion and with notes so sweet
that I was moved to move beyond my mind.

And then the other spirits followed him—
devoutly, gently—through all of that hymn,
their eyes intent on the supernal spheres.

Here, reader, let your eyes look sharp at truth,
for now the veil has grown so very thin—
it is not difficult to pass within.

I saw that company of noble spirits,
silent and looking upward, pale and humble,
as if in expectation; and I saw,

emerging and descending from above,
two angels bearing flaming swords, of which
the blades were broken off, without their tips.

Their garments, just as green as newborn leaves,
were agitated, fanned by their green wings,
and trailed behind them; and one angel came

and stood somewhat above us, while the other
descended on the opposite embankment,
flanking that company of souls between them.

My eyes made out their blond heads clearly, but
my sight was dazzled by their faces—just
like any sense bewildered by excess.

“Both come from Mary’s bosom,” said Sordello,
“to serve as the custodians of the valley
against the serpent that will soon appear.”

At this, not knowing where its path might be,
frozen with fear, I turned around, pressing
close to the trusty shoulders. And Sordello

continued: “Let us now descend among
the great shades in the valley; we shall speak
with them; and seeing you, they will be pleased.”

I think that I had taken but three steps
to go below, when I saw one who watched
attentively, trying to recognize me.

The hour had now arrived when air grows dark,
but not so dark that it deprived my eyes
and his of what—before—they were denied.

He moved toward me, and I advanced toward him.
Noble Judge Nino—what delight was mine
when I saw you were not among the damned!

There was no gracious greeting we neglected
before he asked me: “When did you arrive,
across long seas, beneath this mountainside?”

I told him, “Oh, by way of the sad regions,
I came this morning; I am still within
the first life—although, by this journeying,

I earn the other.” When they heard my answer,
Sordello and Judge Nino, just behind him,
drew back like people suddenly astonished.

One turned to Virgil, and the other turned
and called to one who sat there: “Up, Currado!
Come see what God, out of His grace, has willed!”

Then, when he turned to me: “By that especial
gratitude you owe to Him who hides
his primal aim so that no human mind

may find the ford to it, when you return
across the wide waves, ask my own Giovanna—
there where the pleas of innocents are answered—

to pray for me. I do not think her mother
still loves me: she gave up her white veils—surely,
poor woman, she will wish them back again.

Through her, one understands so easily
how brief, in woman, is love’s fire—when not
rekindled frequently by eye or touch.

The serpent that assigns the Milanese
their camping place will not provide for her
a tomb as fair as would Gallura’s rooster.”

So Nino spoke; his bearing bore the seal
of that unswerving zeal which, though it flames
within the heart, maintains a sense of measure.

My avid eyes were steadfast, staring at
that portion of the sky where stars are slower,
even as spokes when they approach the axle.

And my guide: “Son, what are you staring at?”
And I replied: “I’m watching those three torches
with which this southern pole is all aflame.”

Then he to me: “The four bright stars you saw
this morning now are low, beyond the pole,
and where those four stars were, these three now are.”

Even as Virgil spoke, Sordello drew
him to himself: “See there—our adversary!”
he said; and then he pointed with his finger.

At the unguarded edge of that small valley,
there was a serpent—similar, perhaps,
to that which offered Eve the bitter food.

Through grass and flowers the evil streak advanced;
from time to time it turned its head and licked
its back, like any beast that preens and sleeks.

I did not see—and therefore cannot say—
just how the hawks of heaven made their move,
but I indeed saw both of them in motion.

Hearing the green wings cleave the air, the serpent
fled, and the angels wheeled around as each
of them flew upward, back to his high station.

The shade who, when the judge had called, had drawn
closer to him, through all of that attack,
had not removed his eyes from me one moment.

“So may the lantern that leads you on high
discover in your will the wax one needs—
enough for reaching the enameled peak,”

that shade began, “if you have heard true tidings
of Val di Magra or the lands nearby,
tell them to me—for there I once was mighty.

Currado Malaspina was my name;
I’m not the old Currado, but I am
descended from him: to my own I bore

the love that here is purified.” I answered:
never visited your lands; but can
there be a place in all of Europe where

they are not celebrated? Such renown
honors your house, acclaims your lords and lands—
even if one has yet to journey there.

And so may I complete my climb, I swear
to you: your honored house still claims the prize—
the glory of the purse and of the sword.

Custom and nature privilege it so
that, though the evil head contorts the world,
your kin alone walk straight and shun the path

of wickedness.” And he: “Be sure of that.
The sun will not have rested seven times
within the bed that’s covered and held fast

by all the Ram’s four feet before this gracious
opinion’s squarely nailed into your mind
with stouter nails than others’ talk provides—

if the divine decree has not been stayed.”