As many as the hours in which the sphere
that’s always playing like a child appears
from daybreak to the end of the third hour,

so many were the hours of light still left
before the course of day had reached sunset;
vespers was there; and where we are, midnight.

When sunlight struck directly at our faces,
for we had circled so much of the mountain
that now we headed straight into the west,

then I could feel my vision overcome
by radiance greater than I’d sensed before,
and unaccounted things left me amazed;

at which, that they might serve me as a shade,
I lifted up my hands above my brow,
to limit some of that excessive splendor.

As when a ray of light, from water or
a mirror, leaps in the opposed direction
and rises at an angle equal to

its angle of descent, and to each side
the distance from the vertical is equal,
as science and experiment have shown;

so did it seem to me that I had been
struck there by light reflected, facing me,
at which my eyes turned elsewhere rapidly.

“Kind father, what is that against which I
have tried in vain,” I said, “to screen my eyes?
It seems to move toward us.” And he replied:

“Don’t wonder if you are still dazzled by
the family of Heaven: a messenger
has come, and he invites us to ascend.

Soon, in the sight of such things, there will be
no difficulty for you, but delight—
as much as nature fashioned you to feel.”

No sooner had we reached the blessed angel
than with glad voice he told us: “Enter here;
these are less steep than were the other stairs.”

We climbed, already past that point; behind us,
we heard “Beati misericordes” sung
and then “Rejoice, you who have overcome.”

I and my master journeyed on alone,
we two together, upward; as we walked,
I thought I’d gather profit from his words;

and even as I turned toward him, I asked:
“What did the spirit of Romagna mean
when he said, ‘Sharing cannot have a part’?”

And his reply: “He knows the harm that lies
in his worst vice; if he chastises it,
to ease its expiation—do not wonder.

For when your longings center on things such
that sharing them apportions less to each,
then envy stirs the bellows of your sighs.

But if the love within the Highest Sphere
should turn your longings heavenward, the fear
inhabiting your breast would disappear;

for there, the more there are who would say ‘ours,’
so much the greater is the good possessed
by each—so much more love burns in that cloister.”

“I am more hungry now for satisfaction”
I said, “than if I’d held my tongue before;
I host a deeper doubt within my mind.

How can a good that’s shared by more possessors
enable each to be more rich in it
than if that good had been possessed by few?”

And he to me: “But if you still persist
in letting your mind fix on earthly things,
then even from true light you gather darkness.

That Good, ineffable and infinite,
which is above, directs Itself toward love
as light directs itself to polished bodies.

Where ardor is, that Good gives of Itself;
and where more love is, there that Good confers
a greater measure of eternal worth.

And when there are more souls above who love,
there’s more to love well there, and they love more,
and, mirror—like, each soul reflects the other.

And if my speech has not appeased your hunger,
you will see Beatrice—she will fulfill
this and all other longings that you feel.

Now only strive, so that the other five
wounds may be canceled quickly, as the two
already are—the wounds contrition heals.”

But wanting then to say, “You have appeased me,”
I saw that I had reached another circle,
and my desiring eyes made me keep still.

There I seemed, suddenly, to be caught up
in an ecstatic vision and to see
some people in a temple; and a woman

just at the threshold, in the gentle manner
that mothers use, was saying: “O my son,
why have you done this to us? You can see

how we have sought you—sorrowing, your father
and I.” And at this point, as she fell still,
what had appeared at first now disappeared.

Then there appeared to me another woman:
upon her cheeks—the tears that grief distills
when it is born of much scorn for another.

She said: “If you are ruler of that city
to name which even goddesses once vied—
where every science had its source of light—

revenge yourself on the presumptuous
arms that embraced our daughter, o Pisistratus.”
And her lord seemed to me benign and mild,

his aspect temperate, as he replied:
“What shall we do to one who’d injure us
if one who loves us earns our condemnation?”

Next I saw people whom the fire of wrath
had kindled, as they stoned a youth and kept
on shouting loudly to each other: “Kill!”

“Kill!” “Kill!” I saw him now, weighed down by death,
sink to the ground, although his eyes were bent
always on Heaven—they were Heaven’s gates—

praying to his high Lord, despite the torture,
to pardon those who were his persecutors;
his look was such that it unlocked compassion.

And when my soul returned outside itself
and met the things outside it that are real,
I then could recognize my not false errors.

My guide, on seeing me behave as if
I were a man who’s freed himself from sleep,
said: “What is wrong with you? You can’t walk straight;

for more than half a league now you have moved
with clouded eyes and lurching legs, as if
you were a man whom wine or sleep has gripped!”

“Oh, my kind father, if you hear me out,
I’ll tell you what appeared to me,” I said,
“when I had lost the right use of my legs.”

And he: “Although you had a hundred masks
upon your face, that still would not conceal
from me the thoughts you thought, however slight.

What you have seen was shown lest you refuse
to open up your heart unto the waters
of peace that pour from the eternal fountain.

I did not ask ‘What’s wrong with you?’ as one
who only sees with earthly eyes, which—once
the body, stripped of soul, lies dead—can’t see;

I asked so that your feet might find more force:
so must one urge the indolent, too slow
to use their waking time when it returns.”

We made our way until the end of vespers,
peering, as far ahead as sight could stretch,
at rays of light that, although late, were bright.

But, gradually, smoke as black as night
began to overtake us; and there was
no place where we could have avoided it.

This smoke deprived us of pure air and sight.