In that hour when the heat of day, defeated
by Earth and, sometimes, Saturn, can no longer
warm up the moon—sent cold, when geomancers

can, in the east, see their Fortuna major
rising before the dawn along a path
that will be darkened for it only briefly—

a stammering woman came to me in dream:
her eyes askew, and crooked on her feet,
her hands were crippled, her complexion sallow.

I looked at her; and just as sun revives
cold limbs that night made numb, so did my gaze
loosen her tongue and then, in little time,

set her contorted limbs in perfect order;
and, with the coloring that love prefers,
my eyes transformed the wanness of her features.

And when her speech had been set free, then she
began to sing so, that it would have been
most difficult for me to turn aside.

“I am,” she sang, “I am the pleasing siren,
who in midsea leads mariners astray—
there is so much delight in hearing me.

I turned aside Ulysses, although he
had longed to journey; who grows used to me
seldom departs—I satisfy him so.”

Her lips were not yet done when, there beside me,
a woman showed herself, alert and saintly,
to cast the siren into much confusion.

“O Virgil, Virgil, tell me: who is this?”
she asked most scornfully; and he came forward,
his eyes intent upon that honest one.

He seized the other, baring her in front,
tearing her clothes, and showing me her belly;
the stench that came from there awakened me.

I moved my eyes, and my good master cried:
“At least three times I’ve called you. Rise and come:
let’s find the opening where you may enter.”

I rose; the daylight had already filled
the circles of the sacred mountain—we
were journeying with new sun at our back.

I followed him, bearing my brow like one
whose thoughts have weighed him down, who bends as if
he were the semiarch that forms a bridge,

and then I heard: “Draw near; the pass is here,”
said in a manner so benign and gentle
as, in our mortal land, one cannot hear.

He who addressed us so had open wings,
white as a swan’s; and he directed us
upward, between two walls of the hard rock.

And then he moved his plumes and, fanning us,
affirmed that those “Qui lugent” would be blessed—
their souls would be possessed of consolation.

“What makes you keep your eyes upon the ground?”
my guide began to say to me when both
of us had climbed a little, past the angel.

And I: “What makes me move with such misgiving
is a new vision: it has so beguiled me
that I cannot relinquish thoughts of it.”

“The one you saw,” he said, “that ancient witch—
for her alone one must atone above;
you saw how man can free himself from her.

Let that suffice, and hurry on your way;
fasten your eyes upon the lure that’s spun
by the eternal King with His great spheres.”

Just like a falcon, who at first looks down,
then, when the falconer has called, bends forward,
craving the food that’s ready for him there,

so l became—and so remained until,
through the cleft rock that lets one climb above,
I reached the point at which the circle starts.

When I was in the clearing, the fifth level,
my eyes discovered people there who wept,
lying upon the ground, all turned face down.

“Adhaesit pavimento anima mea,”
I heard them say with sighs so deep that it
was hard to comprehend the words they spoke.

“O God’s elect, whose sufferings both hope
and justice make less difficult, direct
us to the stairway meant for our ascent.”

“If you come here but do not need to be
prostrate, and you would find the path most quickly,
then keep your right hand always to the outside.”

So did the poet ask, so did reply
come from a little way ahead; and I,
hearing that voice reply, learned what was hidden.

I turned my eyes to find my master’s eyes;
at this, with a glad sign, he ratified
what I had asked for with my eager eyes.

When, free to do as I had wanted to,
I moved ahead and bent over that soul
whose words—before—had made me notice him,

saying: “Spirit, within whom weeping ripens
that without which there’s no return to God,
suspend awhile—for me—your greater care.

Tell me: Who were you? And why are your backs
turned up? And there—where I, alive, set out—
would you have me beseech some good for you?”

And he to me: “Why Heaven turns our backs
against itself, you are to know; but first
scias quod ego fui successor Petri.

Between Sestri and Chiavari descends
a handsome river; and its name is set
upon the upper portion of my crest.

For one month and a little more I learned
how the great mantle weighs on him who’d keep it
out of the mire—all other weights seem feathers.

Alas, how tardy my conversion was!
But when I had been named the Roman shepherd,
then I discovered the deceit of life.

I saw that there the heart was not at rest,
nor could I, in that life, ascend more high;
so that, in me, love for this life was kindled.

Until that point I was a squalid soul,
from God divided, wholly avaricious;
now, as you see, I’m punished here for that.

What avarice enacts is here declared
in the purgation of converted souls;
the mountain has no punishment more bitter.

Just as we did not lift our eyes on high
but set our sight on earthly things instead,
so justice here impels our eyes toward earth.

As avarice annulled in us the love
of any other good, and thus we lost
our chance for righteous works, so justice here

fetters our hands and feet and holds us captive;
and for as long as it may please our just
Lord, here we’ll be outstretched and motionless.”

I’d kneeled, wishing to speak: but just as I
began—and through my voice alone—he sensed
that I had meant to do him reverence.

“What reason makes you bend your body so?”
he said. And I to him: “Your dignity
made conscience sting me as I stood erect.”

“Brother, straighten your legs; rise up!” he answered.
“Don’t be mistaken; I, with you and others,
am but a fellow—servant of one Power.

If you have ever understood the holy
sound of the Gospel that says ‘Neque nubent,’
then you will see why I have spoken so.

Now go your way: I’d not have you stop longer;
your staying here disturbs my lamentations,
the tears that help me ripen what you mentioned.

Beyond, I have a niece whose name’s Alagia;
she in herself is good, as long as our
house, by example, brings her not to evil;

and she alone is left to me beyond.”