While I was peering so intently through
the green boughs, like a hunter who, so used,
would waste his life in chasing after birds,

my more than father said to me: “Now come,
son, for the time our journey can permit
is to be used more fruitfully than this.”

I turned my eyes, and I was no less quick
to turn my steps; I followed those two sages,
whose talk was such, my going brought no loss.

And—there!—”Labia mea, Domine”
was wept and sung and heard in such a manner
that it gave birth to both delight and sorrow.

“O gentle father, what is this I hear?”
I asked. And he: “Perhaps they’re shades who go
loosening the knot of what they owe.”

Even as pensive pilgrims do, who when
they’ve overtaken folk unknown to them
along the way, will turn but will not stop,

so, overtaking us—they had come from
behind but were more swift—a crowd of souls,
devout and silent, looked at us in wonder.

Each shade had dark and hollow eyes; their faces
were pale and so emaciated that
their taut skin took its shape from bones beneath.

I don’t believe that even Erysichthon
had been so dried, down to his very hide,
by hunger, when his fast made him fear most.

Thinking, I told myself: “I see the people
who lost Jerusalem, when Mary plunged
her beak into her son.” The orbits of

their eyes seemed like a ring that’s lost its gems;
and he who, in the face of man, would read
OMO would here have recognized the M.

Who—if he knew not how—would have believed
that longing born from odor of a tree,
odor of water, could reduce souls so?

I was already wondering what had
so famished them (for I had not yet learned
the reason for their leanness and sad scurf),

when—there!—a shade, his eyes deep in his head,
turned toward me, staring steadily; and then
he cried aloud: “What grace is granted me!”

I never would have recognized him by
his face; and yet his voice made plain to me
what his appearance had obliterated.

This spark rekindled in me everything
I knew about those altered features; thus,
I realized it was Forese’s face.

“Ah, don’t reproach me for the dried—out scabs
that stain my skin,” he begged, “nor for the lack
of flesh on me; but do tell me the truth

about yourself, do tell me who those two
souls there are, those who are escorting you;
may you not keep yourself from speaking to me!”

“Your face, which I once wept on when you died,”
I answered him, “now gives me no less cause
for sad lament, seeing you so deformed

But tell me, for God’s sake, what has unleaved
you so; don’t make me speak while I’m amazed—
he who’s distracted answers clumsily.”

And he to me: “From the eternal counsel,
the water and the tree you left behind
receive the power that makes me waste away.

All of these souls who, grieving, sing because
their appetite was gluttonous, in thirst
and hunger here resanctify themselves.

The fragrance of the fruit and of the water
that’s sprayed through that green tree kindles in us
craving for food and drink; and not once only,

as we go round this space, our pain’s renewed—
I speak of pain but I should speak of solace,
for we are guided to those trees by that

same longing that had guided Christ when He
had come to free us through the blood He shed
and, in His joyousness, called out: ‘Eli.'”

And I to him: “Forese, from that day
when you exchanged the world for better life
until now, less than five years have revolved;

and if you waited for the moment when
the power to sin was gone before you found
the hour of the good grief that succors us

and weds us once again to God, how have
you come so quickly here? I thought to find
you down below, where time must pay for time.”

And he to me: “It is my Nella who,
with her abundant tears, has guided me
to drink the sweet wormwood of torments: she,

with sighs and prayers devout has set me free
of that slope where one waits and has freed me
from circles underneath this circle. She—

my gentle widow, whom I loved most dearly—
was all the more beloved and prized by God
as she is more alone in her good works.

For even the Barbagia of Sardinia
is far more modest in its women than
is that Barbagia where I left her. O

sweet brother, what would you have had me say?
A future time’s already visible
to me-a time not too far—off from now—

when, from the pulpit, it shall be forbidden
to those immodest ones—Florentine women—
to go displaying bosoms with bare paps.

What ordinances—spiritual, civil—
were ever needed by barbarian or
Saracen women to make them go covered?

But if those shameless ones had certain knowledge
of what swift Heaven’s readying for them,
then they would have mouths open now to howl;

for if our foresight here does not deceive me,
they will be sad before the cheeks of those
whom lullabies can now appease grow beards.

Ah, brother, do not hide things any longer!
You see that I am not alone, for all
these people stare at where you veil the sun.”

At this I said to him: “If you should call
to mind what you have been with me and I
with you, remembering now will still be heavy.

He who precedes me turned me from that life
some days ago, when she who is the sister
of him”—I pointed to the sun—”was showing

her roundness to you. It is he who’s led
me through the deep night of the truly dead
with this true flesh that follows after him.

His help has drawn me up from there, climbing
and circling round this mountain, which makes straight
you whom the world made crooked. And he says

that he will bear me company until
I reach the place where Beatrice is; there
I must remain without him. It is Virgil

who speaks to me in this way,” and I pointed
to him; “this other is the shade for whom,
just now, your kingdom caused its every slope

to tremble as it freed him from itself.”