While we moved at the edge, one first, one after,
and I could often hear my gentle master
saying: “Take care—and do not waste my warning,”

the sun, its rays already altering
the coloring of all the west from azure
to white, was striking me on my right shoulder.

And where my shadow fell, it made the flames
seem more inflamed; and I saw many shades
walking, intent upon a sight so strange.

This was the reason that first prompted them
to speak to me. Among themselves they said:
“He does not seem to have a fictive body.”

Then certain of them came as close to me
as they were able to while, cautiously,
they never left the boundaries of their burning.

“O you who move behind the others not
because of sloth but reverence perhaps,
give me who burn in thirst and fire your answer.

I’m not alone in needing your response;
for all these shades thirst so for it—more than
an Indian or Ethiopian

thirsts for cool water. Tell us how you can—
as if you’re not yet caught within death’s net—
make of yourself a wall against the sun.”

Thus one of them had spoken to me; I
should now have answered clearly, had I not
been fixed on something strangely evident;

for in the middle of the burning path,
came people moving opposite to these—
and I, since they moved left, stared in suspense.

There, on all sides, I can see every shade
move quickly to embrace another shade,
content—they did not pause—with their brief greeting,

as ants, in their dark company, will touch
their muzzles, each to each, perhaps to seek
news of their fortunes and their journeyings.

No sooner is their friendly greeting done
than each shade tries to outcry all the rest
even before he starts to move ahead,

the new group shouting: “Sodom and Gomorrah”;
the other: “That the bull may hurry toward
her lust, Pasiphae hides in the cow.”

Then, just like cranes, of whom a part, to flee
the sun, fly north to Riphean mountains, while
the rest, to flee the frost, fly toward the sands,

one group moves with—the other opposite—us;
and they return with tears to their first chants
and to the shout appropriate to each.

And those who had entreated me came close
again, in the same way they’d done before;
their faces showed how keen they were to listen.

I, seeing their desire once again,
began: “O souls who can be sure of gaining
the state of peace, whenever that may be,

my limbs—mature or green—have not been left
within the world beyond; they’re here with me,
together with their blood and with their bones.

That I be blind no longer, through this place
I pass; above, a lady has gained grace
for me; therefore, I bear my mortal body

across your world. So may your deepest longing
soon be appeased and you be lodged within
the heaven that’s most full of love, most spacious,

please tell me, so that I may yet transcribe it
upon my pages, who you are, and what
crowd moves in the direction opposite.”

Each shade displayed no less astonishment
or less confusion than a mountaineer,
who, even as he stares about, falls silent

when, rough and rustic, he comes to the city;
but when they’d set aside astonishment—
that’s soon subdued in noble hearts—he who

had questioned me before, began again:
“Blessed are you who would, in order to
die better, store experience of our lands!

The people moving opposite us shared
the sin for which once, while in triumph, Caesar
heard ‘Queen’ called out against him; that is why,

as they move off from us, they cry out ‘Sodom,’
reproaching their own selves, as you have heard,
and through their shame abet the fire’s work.

Our sin was with the other sex; but since
we did not keep the bounds of human law,
but served our appetites like beasts, when we

part from the other ranks, we then repeat,
to our disgrace, the name of one who, in
the bestial planks, became herself a beast.

You now know why we act so, and you know
what our sins were; if you would know our names,
time is too short, and I don’t know them all.

But with regard to me, I’ll satisfy
your wish to know: I’m Guido Guinizzelli,
purged here because I grieved before my end.”

As, after the sad raging of Lycurgus,
two sons, finding their mother, had embraced her,
so I desired to do—but dared not to—

when I heard him declare his name: the father
of me and of the others—those, my betters—
who ever used sweet, gracious rhymes of love.

And without hearing, speaking, pensive, I
walked on, still gazing at him, a long time,
prevented by the fire from drawing closer.

When I had fed my sight on him, I offered
myself—with such a pledge that others must
believe—completely ready for his service.

And he to me: “Because of what I hear,
you leave a trace within me—one so clear,
Lethe itself can’t blur or cancel it.

But if your words have now sworn truthfully,
do tell me why it is that you have shown
in speech and gaze that I am dear to you.”

And I to him: “It’s your sweet lines that, for
as long as modern usage lasts, will still
make dear their very inks.” “Brother,” he said,

“he there, whom I point out to you”—he showed
us one who walked ahead—”he was a better
artisan of the mother tongue, surpassing

all those who wrote their poems of love or prose
romances—let the stupid ones contend,
who think that from Limoges there came the best.

They credit rumor rather than the truth,
allowing their opinion to be set
before they hear what art or reason says.

So, many of our fathers once persisted,
voice after voice, in giving to Guittone
the prize—but then, with most, the truth prevailed.

Now if you are so amply privileged
that you will be admitted to the cloister
where Christ is abbot of the college, then

pray say, for me, to Him, a Paternoster—
that is, as much of it as those in this
place need, since we have lost the power to sin.”

Then, to make place, perhaps, for those behind him,
he disappeared into the fire, just as
a fish, through water, plunges toward the bottom.

Saying that my desire was making ready
a place of welcome for his name, I moved
ahead a little, toward the one who had

been pointed out to me. And he spoke freely:
“So does your courteous request please me—
I neither could nor would conceal myself

from you. I am Arnaut, who, going, weep
and sing; with grief, I see my former folly;
with joy, I see the hoped—for day draw near.

Now, by the Power that conducts you to
the summit of the stairway, I pray you:
remember, at time opportune, my pain!”

Then, in the fire that refines, he hid.