“O you upon the holy stream’s far shore,”
so she, turning her speech’s point against me—
even its edge had seemed too sharp—began

again, without allowing interruption,
“tell, tell if this is true; for your confession
must be entwined with such self-accusation.”

My power of speech was so confounded that
my voice would move and yet was spent before
its organs had released it. She forbore

a moment, then she said: “What are you thinking?
Reply to me, the water has not yet
obliterated your sad memories.”

Confusion mixed with fear compelled a Yes
out of my mouth, and yet that Yes was such—
one needed eyes to make out what it was.

Just as a crossbow that is drawn too taut
snaps both its cord and bow when it is shot,
and arrow meets its mark with feeble force,

so, caught beneath that heavy weight, I burst;
and I let tears and sighs pour forth; my voice
had lost its life along its passage out.

At this she said: “In the desire for me
that was directing you to love the Good
beyond which there’s no thing to draw our longing,

what chains were strung, what ditches dug across
your path that, once you’d come upon them, caused
your loss of any hope of moving forward?”

What benefits and what allurements were
so evident upon the brow of others
that you had need to promenade before them?”

After I had withheld a bitter sigh,
I scarcely had the voice for my reply,
but, laboring, my lips gave my words form.

Weeping, I answered: “Mere appearances
turned me aside with their false loveliness,
as soon as I had lost your countenance.”

And she: “Had you been silent or denied
what you confess, your guilt would not be less
in evidence: it’s known by such a Judge!

But when the charge of sinfulness has burst
from one’s own cheek, then in our court the whet—
stone turns and blunts our blade’s own cutting edge.

Nevertheless, that you may feel more shame
for your mistake, and that—in time to come—
hearing the Sirens, you may be more strong,

have done with all the tears you sowed, and listen:
so shall you hear how, unto other ends,
my buried flesh should have directed you.

Nature or art had never showed you any
beauty that matched the lovely limbs in which
I was enclosed—limbs scattered now in dust;

and if the highest beauty failed you through
my death, what mortal thing could then induce
you to desire it? For when the first

arrow of things deceptive struck you, then
you surely should have lifted up your wings
to follow me, no longer such a thing.

No green young girl or other novelty—
such brief delight—should have weighed down your wings,
awaiting further shafts. The fledgling bird

must meet two or three blows before he learns,
but any full-fledged bird is proof against
the net that has been spread or arrow, aimed.”

As children, when ashamed, will stand, their eyes
upon the ground—they listen, silently,
acknowledging their fault repentantly—

so did I stand; and she enjoined me: “Since
hearing alone makes you grieve so, lift up
your beard, and sight will bring you greater tears.”

There’s less resistance in the sturdy oak
to its uprooting by a wind from lands
of ours or lands of Iarbas than I showed

in lifting up my chin at her command;
I knew quite well—when she said “beard” but meant
my face—the poison in her argument.

When I had raised my face upright, my eyes
were able to perceive that the first creatures
had paused and were no longer scattering flowers;

and still uncertain of itself, my vision
saw Beatrice turned toward the animal
that is, with its two natures, but one person.

Beneath her veil, beyond the stream, she seemed
so to surpass her former self in beauty
as, here on earth, she had surpassed all others.

The nettle of remorse so stung me then,
that those—among all other—things that once
most lured my love, became most hateful to me.

Such self-indictment seized my heart that I
collapsed, my senses slack; what I became
is known to her who was the cause of it.

Then, when my heart restored my outer sense,
I saw the woman whom I’d found alone,
standing above me, saying: “Hold, hold me!”

She’d plunged me, up to my throat, in the river,
and, drawing me behind her, she now crossed,
light as a gondola, along the surface.

When I was near the blessed shore, I heard
“Asperges me” so sweetly sung that I
cannot remember or, much less, transcribe it.

The lovely woman opened wide her arms;
she clasped my head, and then she thrust me under
to that point where I had to swallow water.

That done, she drew me out and led me, bathed,
into the dance of the four lovely women;
and each one placed her arm above my head.

“Here we are nymphs; in heaven, stars; before
she had descended to the world, we were
assigned, as her handmaids, to Beatrice;

we’ll be your guides unto her eyes; but it
will be the three beyond, who see more deeply,
who’ll help you penetrate her joyous light.”

So, singing, they began; then, leading me
together with them to the griffin’s breast,
where Beatrice, turned toward us, stood, they said:

“See that you are not sparing of your gaze:
before you we have set those emeralds
from which Love once had aimed his shafts at you.”

A thousand longings burning more than flames
compelled my eyes to watch the radiant eyes
that, motionless, were still fixed on the griffin.

Just like the sun within a mirror, so
the double-natured creature gleamed within,
now showing one, and now the other guise.

Consider, reader, if I did not wonder
when I saw something that displayed no movement
though its reflected image kept on changing.

And while, full of astonishment and gladness,
my soul tasted that food which, even as
it quenches hunger, spurs the appetite,

the other three, whose stance showed them to be
the members of a higher troop, advanced—
and, to their chant, they danced angelically.

“Turn, Beatrice, o turn your holy eyes
upon your faithful one,” their song beseeched,
“who, that he might see you, has come so far.

Out of your grace, do us this grace; unveil
your lips to him, so that he may discern
the second beauty you have kept concealed.”

O splendor of eternal living light,
who’s ever grown so pale beneath Parnassus’
shade or has drunk so deeply from its fountain,

that he’d not seem to have his mind confounded,
trying to render you as you appeared
where heaven’s harmony was your pale likeness—

your face, seen through the air, unveiled completely?