Weeping, the women then began—now three,
now four, alternately—to psalm gently,
“Deus venerunt gentes”; and at this,

sighing and full of pity, Beatrice
was changed; she listened, grieving little less
than Mary when, beneath the Cross, she wept.

But when the seven virgins had completed
their psalm, and she was free to speak, erect,
her coloring like ardent fire, she answered:

“Modicum, et non videbitis me
et iterum sisters delightful to me,
modicum, et vos videbitis me.”

Then she set all the seven nymphs in front
of her and signaled me, the lady, and
the sage who had remained, to move behind her.

So she advanced; and I do not believe
that she had taken her tenth step upon
the ground before her eyes had struck my eyes;

and gazing tranquilly, “Pray come more quickly,”
she said to me, “so that you are more ready
to listen to me should I speak to you.”

As soon as I, responding to my duty,
had joined her, she said: “Brother, why not try,
since now you’re at my side, to query me?”

Like those who, speaking to superiors
too reverently do not speak distinctly,
not drawing their clear voice up to their teeth—

so did I speak with sound too incomplete
when I began: “Lady, you know my need
to know, and know how it can be appeased.”

And she to me: “I’d have you disentangle
yourself, from this point on, from fear and shame,
that you no longer speak like one who dreams.

Know that the vessel which the serpent broke
was and is not; but he whose fault it is
may rest assured—God’s vengeance fears no hindrance.

The eagle that had left its plumes within
the chariot, which then became a monster
and then a prey, will not forever be

without an heir; for I can plainly see,
and thus I tell it: stars already close
at hand, which can’t be blocked or checked, will bring

a time in which, dispatched by God, a Five
Hundred and Ten and Five will slay the whore
together with that giant who sins with her.

And what I tell, as dark as Sphinx and Themis,
may leave you less convinced because—like these—
it tires the intellect with quandaries;

but soon events themselves will be the Naiads
that clarify this obstinate enigma—
but without injury to grain or herds.

Take note; and even as I speak these words,
do you transmit them in your turn to those
who live the life that is a race to death.

And when you write them, keep in mind that you
must not conceal what you’ve seen of the tree
that now has been despoiled twice over here.

Whoever robs or rends that tree offends,
with his blaspheming action, God; for He
created it for His sole use—holy.

For tasting of that tree, the first soul waited
five thousand years and more in grief and longing
for Him who on Himself avenged that taste.

Your intellect’s asleep if it can’t see
how singular’s the cause that makes that tree
so tall and makes it grow invertedly.

And if, like waters of the Elsa, your
vain thoughts did not encrust your mind; if your
delight in them were not like Pyramus

staining the mulberry, you’d recognize
in that tree’s form and height the moral sense
God’s justice had when He forbade trespass.

But since I see your intellect is made
of stone and, petrified, grown so opaque—
the light of what I say has left you dazed—

I’d also have you bear my words within you—
if not inscribed, at least outlined—just as
the pilgrim’s staff is brought back wreathed with palm.”

And I: “Even as wax the seal’s impressed,
where there’s no alteration in the form,
so does my brain now bear what you have stamped.”

But why does your desired word ascend
so high above my understanding that
the more I try, the more am I denied?”

“That you may recognize,” she said, “the school
that you have followed and may see if what
it taught can comprehend what I have said—

and see that, as the earth is distant from
the highest and the swiftest of the heavens,
so distant is your way from the divine.”

And I replied to her: “I don’t remember
making myself a stranger to you, nor
does conscience gnaw at me because of that.”

“And if you can’t remember that,” she answered,
smiling, “then call to mind how you—today—
have drunk of Lethe; and if smoke is proof

of fire, then it is clear: we can conclude
from this forgetfulness, that in your will
there was a fault—your will had turned elsewhere.

But from now on the words I speak will be
naked; that is appropriate if they
would be laid bare before your still—crude sight.”

More incandescent now, with slower steps,
the sun was pacing the meridian,
which alters with the place from which it’s seen,

when, just as one who serves as escort for
a group will halt if he has come upon
things strange or even traces of strangeness,

the seven ladies halted at the edge
of a dense shadow such as mountains cast,
beneath green leaves and black boughs, on cold banks.

In front of them I seemed to see Euphrates
and Tigris issuing from one same spring
and then, as friends do, separating slowly.

“O light, o glory of the human race,
what water is this, flowing from one source
and then becoming distant from itself?”

Her answer to what I had asked was: “Ask
Matilda to explain this”; and the lovely
lady, as one who frees herself from blame,

replied: “He’s heard of this and other matters
from me; and I am sure that Lethe’s waters
have not obscured his memory of this.”

And Beatrice :”Perhaps some greater care,
which often weakens memory, has made
his mind, in things regarding sight, grow dark.

But see Eunoe as it flows from there:
lead him to it and, as you’re used to doing,
revive the power that is faint in him.”

As would the noble soul, which offers no
excuse, but makes another’s will its own
as soon as signs reveal that will; just so,

when she had taken me, the lovely lady
moved forward; and she said with womanly
courtesy to Statius: “Come with him.”

If, reader, I had ampler space in which
to write, I’d sing—though incompletely—that
sweet draught for which my thirst was limitless;

but since all of the pages pre-disposed
for this, the second canticle, are full,
the curb of art will not let me continue.

From that most holy wave I now returned
to Beatrice; remade, as new trees are
renewed when they bring forth new boughs, I was

pure and prepared to climb unto the stars.