“Hosanna, sanctus Deus sabaoth,
superillustrans claritate tua
felices ignes horum malacoth!”

Thus, even as he wheeled to his own music,
I saw that substance sing, that spirit—flame
above whom double lights were twinned; and he

and his companions moved within their dance,
and as if they were swiftest sparks, they sped
out of my sight because of sudden distance.

I was perplexed, and to myself, I said:
“Tell her! Tell her! Tell her, the lady who
can slake my thirst with her sweet drops”; and yet

the reverence that possesses all of me,
even on hearing only Be and ice,
had bowed my head—I seemed a man asleep.

But Beatrice soon ended that; for she
began to smile at me so brightly that,
even in fire, a man would still feel glad.

“According to my never—erring judgment,
the question that perplexes you is how
just vengeance can deserve just punishment;

but I shall quickly free your mind from doubt;
and listen carefully; the words I speak
will bring the gift of a great truth in reach.

Since he could not endure the helpful curb
on his willpower, the man who was not born,
damning himself, damned all his progeny.

For this, mankind lay sick, in the abyss
of a great error, for long centuries,
until the Word of God willed to descend

to where the nature that was sundered from
its Maker was united to His person
by the sole act of His eternal Love.

Now set your sight on what derives from that.
This nature, thus united to its Maker,
was good and pure, even as when created;

but in itself, this nature had been banished
from paradise, because it turned aside
from its own path, from truth, from its own life.

Thus, if the penalty the Cross inflicted
is measured by the nature He assumed,
no one has ever been so justly stung;

yet none was ever done so great a wrong,
if we regard the Person made to suffer,
He who had gathered in Himself that nature.

Thus, from one action, issued differing things:
God and the Jews were pleased by one same death;
earth trembled for that death and Heaven opened.

You need no longer find it difficult
to understand when it is said that just
vengeance was then avenged by a just court.

But I now see your understanding tangled
by thought on thought into a knot, from which,
with much desire, your mind awaits release.

You say: ‘What I have heard is clear to me;
but this is hidden from me—why God willed
precisely this pathway for our redemption.’

Brother, this ordinance is buried from
the eyes of everyone whose intellect
has not matured within the flame of love.

Nevertheless, since there is much attempting
to find this point, but little understanding,
I shall tell why that way was the most fitting.

The Godly Goodness that has banished every
envy from Its own Self, burns in Itself;
and sparkling so, It shows eternal beauties.

All that derives directly from this Goodness
is everlasting, since the seal of Goodness
impresses an imprint that never alters.

Whatever rains from It immediately
is fully free, for it is not constrained
by any influence of other things.

Even as it conforms to that Goodness,
so does it please It more; the Sacred Ardor
that gleams in all things is most bright within

those things most like Itself. The human being
has all these gifts, but if it loses one,
then its nobility has been undone.

Only man’s sin annuls man’s liberty,
makes him unlike the Highest Good, so that,
in him, the brightness of Its light is dimmed;

and man cannot regain his dignity
unless, where sin left emptiness, man fills
that void with just amends for evil pleasure.

For when your nature sinned so totally
within its seed, then, from these dignities,
just as from Paradise, that nature parted;

and they could never be regained—if you
consider carefully—by any way
that did not pass across one of these fords:

either through nothing other than His mercy,
God had to pardon man, or of himself
man had to proffer payment for his folly.

Now fix your eyes on the profundity
of the Eternal Counsel; heed as closely
as you are able to, my reasoning.

Man, in his limits, could not recompense;
for no obedience, no humility,
he offered later could have been so deep

that it could match the heights he meant to reach
through disobedience; man lacked the power
to offer satisfaction by himself.

Thus there was need for God, through His own ways,
to bring man back to life intact—I mean
by one way or by both. But since a deed

pleases its doer more, the more it shows
the goodness of the heart from which it springs,
the Godly Goodness that imprints the world

was happy to proceed through both Its ways
to raise you up again. Nor has there been,
nor will there be, between the final night

and the first day, a chain of actions so
lofty and so magnificent as He
enacted when He followed His two ways;

for God showed greater generosity
in giving His own self that man might be
able to rise, than if He simply pardoned;

for every other means fell short of justice,
except the way whereby the Son of God
humbled Himself when He became incarnate.

Now to give all your wishes full content,
I go back to explain one point, so that
you, too, may see it plainly, as I do.

You say: ‘I see that water, see that fire
and air and earth and all that they compose
come to corruption, and endure so briefly;

and yet these, too, were things created; if
what has been said above is true, then these
things never should be subject to corruption.’

Brother, the angels and the pure country
where you are now—these may be said to be
created, as they are, in all their being;

whereas the elements that you have mentioned,
as well as those things that are made from them,
receive their form from a created power.

The matter they contain had been created,
just as within the stars that wheel about them,
the power to give form had been created.

The rays and motion of the holy lights
draw forth the soul of every animal
and plant from matter able to take form;

but your life is breathed forth immediately
by the Chief Good, who so enamors it
of His own Self that it desires Him always.

So reasoning, you also can deduce
your resurrection; you need but remember
the way in which your human flesh was fashioned

when both of the first parents were created.”