When any of our faculties retains
a strong impression of delight or pain,
the soul will wholly concentrate on that,

neglecting any other power it has
(and this refutes the error that maintains
that—one above the other—several souls

can flame in us); and thus, when something seen
or heard secures the soul in stringent grip,
time moves and yet we do not notice it.

The power that perceives the course of time
is not the power that captures all the mind;
the former has no force—the latter binds.

And I confirmed this by experience,
hearing that spirit in my wonderment;
for though the sun had fully climbed fifty

degrees, I had not noticed it, when we
came to the point at which in unison
those souls cried out to us: “Here’s what you want.”

The farmer, when the grape is darkening,
will often stuff a wider opening
with just a little forkful of his thorns,

than was the gap through which my guide and I,
who followed after, climbed, we two alone,
after that company of souls had gone.

San Leo can be climbed, one can descend
to Noli and ascend Cacume and
Bismantova with feet alone, but here

I had to fly: I mean with rapid wings
and pinions of immense desire, behind
the guide who gave me hope and was my light.

We made our upward way through rifted rock;
along each side the edges pressed on us;
the ground beneath required feet and hands.

When we had reached the upper rim of that
steep bank, emerging on the open slope,
I said: “My master, what way shall we take?”

And he to me: “Don’t squander any steps;
keep climbing up the mountain after me
until we find some expert company.”

The summit was so high, my sight fell short;
the slope was far more steep than the line drawn
from middle—quadrant to the center point.

I was exhausted when I made this plea:
“O gentle father, turn around and see—
I will be left alone unless you halt.”

“My son,” he said, “draw yourself up to there,”
while pointing to a somewhat higher terrace,
which circles all the slope along that side.

His words incited me; my body tried;
on hands and knees I scrambled after him
until the terrace lay beneath my feet.

There we sat down together, facing east,
in the direction from which we had come:
what joy—to look back at a path we’ve climbed!

My eyes were first set on the shores below,
and then I raised them toward the sun; I was
amazed to find it fall upon our left.

And when the poet saw that I was struck
with wonder as I watched the chariot
of light passing between the north and us,

he said to me: “Suppose Castor and Pollux
were in conjunction with that mirror there,
which takes the light and guides it north and south,

then you would see the reddish zodiac
still closer to the Bears as it revolves—
unless it has abandoned its old track.

If you would realize how that should be,
then concentrate, imagining this mountain
so placed upon this earth that both Mount Zion

and it, although in different hemispheres,
share one horizon; therefore, you can see,
putting your mind to it attentively,

how that same path which Phaethon drove so poorly
must pass this mountain on the north, whereas
it skirts Mount Zion on the southern side.”

I said: “My master, surely I have never—
since my intelligence seemed lacking—seen
as clearly as I now can comprehend,

that the mid—circle of the heavens’ motion
(one of the sciences calls it Equator),
which always lies between the sun and winter,

as you explained, lies as far north of here
as it lies southward of the site from which
the Hebrews, looking toward the tropics, saw it.

But if it please you, I should willingly
learn just how far it is we still must journey:
the slope climbs higher than my eyes can follow.”

And he to me: “This mountain’s of such sort
that climbing it is hardest at the start;
but as we rise, the slope grows less unkind.

Therefore, when this slope seems to you so gentle
that climbing farther up will be as restful
as traveling downstream by boat, you will

be where this pathway ends, and there you can
expect to put your weariness to rest.
I say no more, and this I know as truth.”

And when his words were done, another voice
nearby was heard to say: “Perhaps you will
have need to sit before you reach that point!”

Hearing that voice, both of us turned around,
and to the left we saw a massive boulder,
which neither he nor I—before—had noticed.

We made our way toward it and toward the people
who lounged behind that boulder in the shade,
as men beset by listlessness will rest.

And one of them, who seemed to me exhausted,
was sitting with his arms around his knees;
between his knees, he kept his head bent down.

“O my sweet lord,” I said, “look carefully
at one who shows himself more languid than
he would have been were laziness his sister!”

Then that shade turned toward us attentively,
lifting his eyes, but just above his thigh,
and said: “Climb, then, if you’re so vigorous!”

Then I knew who he was, and the distress
that still was quickening my breath somewhat,
did not prevent my going to him; and

when I had reached him, scarcely lifting up
his head, he said: “And have you fathomed how
the sun can drive his chariot on your left?”

The slowness of his movements, his brief words
had stirred my lips a little toward a smile;
then I began: “From this time on, Belacqua,

I need not grieve for you; but tell me, why
do you sit here? Do you expect a guide?
Or have you fallen into your old ways?”

And he: “O brother, what’s the use of climbing?
God’s angel, he who guards the gate, would not
let me pass through to meet my punishment.

Outside that gate the skies must circle round
as many times as they did when I lived—
since I delayed good sighs until the end—

unless, before then, I am helped by prayer
that rises from a heart that lives in grace;
what use are other prayers—ignored by Heaven?”

And now the poet climbed ahead, before me,
and said: “It’s time; see the meridian
touched by the sun; elsewhere, along the Ocean,

night now has set its foot upon Morocco.”