When dicing’s done and players separate,
the loser’s left alone, disconsolate—
rehearsing what he’d thrown, he sadly learns;

all of the crowd surrounds the one who won—
one goes in front, and one tugs at his back,
and at his side one asks to be remembered;

he does not halt but listens to them all;
and when he gives them something, they desist;
and so he can fend off the pressing throng.

And I, in that persistent pack, was such:
this way and that, I turned my face to them
and, making promises, escaped their clutch.

There was the Aretine who met his death
beneath Ghino di Tacco’s bestial hands,
and one who drowned when, in pursuit, he ran.

There, with his outstretched hands, was Federigo
Novello, praying, and the Pisan who
made good Marzucco show his fortitude.

I saw Count Orso, and I saw the soul
cleft from its body out of spite and envy—
not, so it said, because it had been guilty—

I mean Pier de la Brosse (and may the Lady
of Brabant, while she’s still in this world, watch
her ways—or end among a sadder flock).

As soon as I was free from all those shades
who always pray for others’ prayers for them,
so as to reach their blessed state more quickly,

I started: “O my light, it seems to me
that in one passage you deny expressly
that prayer can bend the rule of Heaven, yet

these people pray precisely for that end.
Is their hope, therefore, only emptiness,
or have I not read clearly what you said?”

And he to me: “My text is plain enough,
and yet their hope is not delusive if
one scrutinizes it with sober wit;

the peak of justice is not lowered when
the fire of love accomplishes in one
instant the expiation owed by all

who dwell here; for where I asserted this—
that prayers could not mend their fault—I spoke
of prayers without a passageway to God.

But in a quandary so deep, do not
conclude with me, but wait for word that she,
the light between your mind and truth, will speak—

lest you misunderstand, the she I mean
is Beatrice; upon this mountain’s peak,
there you shall see her smiling joyously.”

And I: “Lord, let us move ahead more quickly,
for now I am less weary than before;
and—you can see—the slope now casts a shadow.”

“As long as it is day, we’ll make as much
headway as possible,” he answered; “but
our climb won’t be as rapid as you thought.

You will not reach the peak before you see
the sun returning: now he hides behind
the hills—you cannot interrupt his light.

But see—beyond—a soul who is completely
apart, and seated, looking toward us; he
will show us where to climb most speedily.”

We came to him. O Lombard soul, what pride
and what disdain were in your stance! Your eyes
moved with such dignity, such gravity!

He said no thing to us but let us pass,
his eyes intent upon us only as
a lion watches when it is at rest.

Yet Virgil made his way to him, appealing
to him to show us how we’d best ascend;
and he did not reply to that request,

but asked us what our country was and who
we were, at which my gentle guide began
“Mantua”—and that spirit, who had been

so solitary, rose from his position,
saying:”O Mantuan, I am Sordello,
from your own land!” And each embraced the other.

Ah, abject Italy, you inn of sorrows,
you ship without a helmsman in harsh seas,
no queen of provinces but of bordellos!

That noble soul had such enthusiasm:
his city’s sweet name was enough for him
to welcome—there—his fellow—citizen;

But those who are alive within you now
can’t live without their warring—even those
whom one same wall and one same moat enclose

gnaw at each other. Squalid Italy,
search round your shores and then look inland—see
if any part of you delight in peace.

What use was there in a Justinian’s
mending your bridle, when the saddle’s empty?
Indeed, were there no reins, your shame were less.

Ah you—who if you understood what God
ordained, would then attend to things devout
and in the saddle surely would allow

Caesar to sit—see how this beast turns fierce
because there are no spurs that would correct it,
since you have laid your hands upon the bit!

O German Albert, you who have abandoned
that steed become recalcitrant and savage,
you who should ride astride its saddlebows—

upon your blood may the just judgment of
the stars descend with signs so strange and plain
that your successor has to feel its terror!

For both you and your father, in your greed
for lands that lay more close at hand, allowed
the garden of the Empire to be gutted.

Come—you who pay no heed—do come and see
Montecchi, Cappelletti, sad already,
and, filled with fear, Monaldi, Filippeschi.

Come, cruel one, come see the tribulation
of your nobility and heal their hurts;
see how disconsolate is Santafior!

Come, see your Rome who, widowed and alone,
weeps bitterly; both day and night, she moans:
“My Caesar, why are you not at my side?”

Come, see how much your people love each other!
And if no pity for us moves you, may
shame for your own repute move you to act.

And if I am allowed, o highest Jove,
to ask: You who on earth were crucified
for us—have You turned elsewhere Your just eyes?

Or are You, in Your judgment’s depth, devising
a good that we cannot foresee, completely
dissevered from our way of understanding?

For all the towns of Italy are full
of tyrants, and each townsman who becomes
a partisan is soon a new Marcellus.

My Florence, you indeed may be content
that this digression would leave you exempt:
your people’s strivings spare you this lament.

Others have justice in their hearts, and thought
is slow to let it fly off from their bow;
but your folk keep it ready—on their lips.

Others refuse the weight of public service;
whereas your people—eagerly—respond,
even unasked, and shout: “I’ll take it on.”

You might be happy now, for you have cause!
You with your riches, peace, judiciousness!
If I speak truly, facts won’t prove me wrong.

Compared to you, Athens and Lacedaemon,
though civil cities, with their ancient laws,
had merely sketched the life of righteousness;

for you devise provisions so ingenious—
whatever threads October sees you spin,
when mid—November comes, will be unspun.

How often, in the time you can remember,
have you changed laws and coinage, offices
and customs, and revised your citizens!

And if your memory has some clarity,
then you will see yourself like that sick woman
who finds no rest upon her feather—bed,

but, turning, tossing, tries to ease her pain.