When glad and gracious welcomings had been
repeated three and four times, then Sordello
drew himself back and asked: “But who are you?”

“Before the spirits worthy of ascent
to God had been directed to this mountain,
my bones were buried by Octavian.

I am Virgil, and I am deprived of Heaven
for no fault other than my lack of faith.”
This was the answer given by my guide.

Even like one who, suddenly, has seen
something before him and then, marveling,
does and does not believe, saying, “It is…

is not,” so did Sordello seem, and then
he bent his brow, returned to Virgil humbly,
and clasped him where the lesser presence clasps.

He said: “O glory of the Latins, you
through whom our tongue revealed its power, you,
eternal honor of my native city,

what merit or what grace shows you to me?
If I deserve to hear your word, then answer:
tell me if you’re from Hell and from what cloister.”

“Through every circle of the sorry kingdom,”
he answered him, “I journeyed here; a power
from Heaven moved me, and with that, I come.

Not for the having—but not having—done,
I lost the sight that you desire, the Sun—
that high Sun I was late in recognizing.

There is a place below that only shadows—
not torments—have assigned to sadness; there,
lament is not an outcry, but a sigh.

There I am with the infant innocents,
those whom the teeth of death had seized before
they were set free from human sinfulness;

there I am with those souls who were not clothed
in the three holy virtues—but who knew
and followed after all the other virtues.

But if you know and you are able to,
would you point out the path that leads more quickly
to the true entry point of Purgatory?”

He answered: “No fixed place has been assigned
to us; I’m free to range about and climb;
as far as I may go, I’ll be your guide.

But see now how the day declines; by night
we cannot climb; and therefore it is best
to find some pleasant place where we can rest.

Here to the right are spirits set apart;
if you allow me, I shall lead you to them;
and not without delight, you’ll come to know them.”

“How is that?” he was asked. “Is it that he
who tried to climb by night would be impeded
by others, or by his own lack of power?”

And good Sordello, as his finger traced
along the ground, said: “Once the sun has set,
then—look—even this line cannot be crossed.

And not that anything except the dark
of night prevents your climbing up; it is
the night itself that implicates your will.

Once darkness falls, one can indeed retreat
below and wander aimlessly about
the slopes, while the horizon has enclosed

the day.” At which my lord, as if in wonder,
said: “Lead us then to there where, as you say,
we may derive delight from this night’s stay.”

We had not gone far off, when I perceived
that, just as valleys hollow mountains here
in our world, so that mountain there was hollowed.

That shade said: “It is there that we shall go—
to where the slope forms, of itself, a lap;
at that place we’ll await the new day’s coming.”

There was a slanting path, now steep, now flat;
it led us to a point beside the valley,
just where its bordering edge had dropped by half.

Gold and fine silver, cochineal, white lead,
and Indian lychnite, highly polished, bright,
fresh emerald at the moment it is dampened,

if placed within that valley, all would be
defeated by the grass and flowers’ colors,
just as the lesser gives way to the greater.

And nature there not only was a painter,
but from the sweetness of a thousand odors,
she had derived an unknown, mingled scent.

Upon the green grass and the flowers, I
saw seated spirits singing “Salve, Regina”;
they were not visible from the outside.

“Before the meager sun seeks out its nest,”
began the Mantuan who led us here,
“do not ask me to guide you down among them.

From this bank, you’ll be better able to
make out the acts and features of them all
than if you were to join them in the hollow.

He who is seated highest, with the look
of one too lax in what he undertook—
whose mouth, although the rest sing, does not move

was Emperor Rudolph, one who could have healed
the wounds that were the death of Italy,
so that another, later, must restore her.

His neighbor, whose appearance comforts him,
governed the land in which are born the waters
the Moldau carries to the Elbe and

the Elbe to the sea: named Ottokar—
in swaddling—bands he was more valiant than
his son, the bearded Wenceslaus, who feeds

on wantonness and ease. That small—nosed man,
who seems so close in counsel with his kindly
friend, died in flight, deflowering the lily:

see how he beats his breast there! And you see
the other shade, who, as he sighs, would rest
his cheek upon his palm as on a bed.

Father and father—in—law of the pest
of France, they know his life—its filth, its vice;
out of that knowledge grows the grief that has

pierced them. That other, who seems so robust
and sings in time with him who has a nose
so manly, wore the cord of every virtue;

and if the young man seated there behind him
had only followed him as king, then valor
might have been poured from vessel unto vessel;

one cannot say this of his other heirs;
his kingdoms now belong to James and Frederick—
but they do not possess his best bequest.

How seldom human worth ascends from branch
to branch, and this is willed by Him who grants
that gift, that one may pray to Him for it!

My words suggest the large—nosed one no less
than they refer to Peter, singing with him,
whose heir brings Puglia and Provence distress:

the plant is lesser than its seed, just as
the man whom Beatrice and Margaret wed
is lesser than the husband Constance has.

You see the king who led the simple life
seated alone: Henry of England—he
has better fortune with his progeny.

He who is seated lowest on the ground,
and looking up, is William the Marquis—
for him, both Alexandria and its war

make Monferrato and Canavese mourn.”