As oxen, yoked, proceed abreast, so I
moved with that burdened soul as long as my
kind pedagogue allowed me to; but when

he said: “Leave him behind, and go ahead;
for here it’s fitting that with wings and oars
each urge his boat along with all his force,”

I drew my body up again, erect—
the stance most suitable to man—and yet
the thoughts I thought were still submissive, bent.

Now I was on my way, and willingly
I followed in my teacher’s steps, and we
together showed what speed we could command.

He said to me: “Look downward, for the way
will offer you some solace if you pay
attention to the pavement at your feet.”

As, on the lids of pavement tombs, there are
stone effigies of what the buried were
before, so that the dead may be remembered;

and there, when memory—inciting only
the pious—has renewed their mourning, men
are often led to shed their tears again;

so did I see, but carved more skillfully,
with greater sense of likeness, effigies
on all the path protruding from the mountain.

I saw, to one side of the path, one who
had been created nobler than all other
beings, falling lightning—like from Heaven.

I saw, upon the other side, Briareus
transfixed by the celestial shaft: he lay,
ponderous, on the ground, in fatal cold.

I saw Thymbraeus, I saw Mars and Pallas,
still armed, as they surrounded Jove, their father,
gazing upon the Giants’ scattered limbs.

I saw bewildered Nimrod at the foot
of his great labor; watching him were those
of Shinar who had shared his arrogance.

O Niobe, what tears afflicted me
when, on that path, I saw your effigy
among your slaughtered children, seven and seven!

O Saul, you were portrayed there as one who
had died on his own sword, upon Gilboa,
which never after knew the rain, the dew!

O mad Arachne, I saw you already
half spider, wretched on the ragged remnants
of work that you had wrought to your own hurt!

O Rehoboam, you whose effigy
seems not to menace there, and yet you flee
by chariot, terrified, though none pursues!

It also showed-that pavement of hard stone—
how much Alcmaeon made his mother pay:
the cost of the ill—omened ornament.

It showed the children of Sennacherib
as they assailed their father in the temple,
then left him, dead, behind them as they fled.

It showed the slaughter and the devastation
wrought by Tomyris when she taunted Cyrus:
“You thirsted after blood; with blood I fill you.”

It showed the rout of the Assyrians,
sent reeling after Holofernes’ death,
and also showed his body—what was left.

I saw Troy turned to caverns and to ashes;
O Ilium, your effigy in stone—
it showed you there so squalid, so cast down!

What master of the brush or of the stylus
had there portrayed such masses, such outlines
as would astonish all discerning minds?

The dead seemed dead and the alive, alive:
I saw, head bent, treading those effigies,
as well as those who’d seen those scenes directly.

Now, sons of Eve, persist in arrogance,
in haughty stance, do not let your eyes bend,
lest you be forced to see your evil path!

We now had circled round more of the mountain
and much more of the sun’s course had been crossed
than I, my mind absorbed, had gauged, when he

who always looked ahead insistently,
as he advanced, began: “Lift up your eyes;
it’s time to set these images aside.

See there an angel hurrying to meet us,
and also see the sixth of the handmaidens
returning from her service to the day.

Adorn your face and acts with reverence,
that he be pleased to send us higher. Remember—
today will never know another dawn.”

I was so used to his insistent warnings
against the loss of time; concerning that,
his words to me could hardly be obscure.

That handsome creature came toward us; his clothes
were white, and in his aspect he seemed like
the trembling star that rises in the morning.

He opened wide his arms, then spread his wings;
he said: “Approach: the steps are close at hand;
from this point on one can climb easily.

This invitation’s answered by so few:
o humankind, born for the upward flight,
why are you driven back by wind so slight?”

He led us to a cleft within the rock,
and then he struck my forehead with his wing;
that done, he promised me safe journeying.

As on the right, when one ascends the hill
where—over Rubaconte’s bridge—there stands
the church that dominates the well—ruled city,

the daring slope of the ascent is broken
by steps that were constructed in an age
when record books and measures could be trusted,

so was the slope that plummets there so steeply
down from the other ring made easier;
but on this side and that, high rock encroaches.

While we began to move in that direction,
“Beati pauperes spiritu” was sung
so sweetly—it can not be told in words.

How different were these entryways from those
of Hell! For here it is with song one enters;
down there, it is with savage lamentations.

Now we ascended by the sacred stairs,
but I seemed to be much more light than I
had been, before, along the level terrace.

At this I asked: “Master, tell me, what heavy
weight has been lifted from me, so that I,
in going, notice almost no fatigue?”

He answered: “When the P’s that still remain
upon your brow—now almost all are faint—
have been completely, like this P. erased,

your feet will be so mastered by good will
that they not only will not feel travail
but will delight when they are urged uphill.”

Then I behaved like those who make their way
with something on their head of which they’re not
aware, till others’ signs make them suspicious,

at which, the hand helps them to ascertain;
it seeks and finds and touches and provides
the services that sight cannot supply;

so, with my right hand’s outspread fingers, I
found just six of the letters once inscribed
by him who holds the keys, upon my forehead;

and as he watched me do this, my guide smiled.