The angel now was left behind us, he
who had directed us to the sixth terrace,
having erased one P that scarred my face;

he had declared that those who longed for justice
are blessed, and his voice concluded that
message with “sitiunt,” without the rest.

And while I climbed behind the two swift spirits,
not laboring at all, for I was lighter
than I had been along the other stairs,

Virgil began: “Love that is kindled by
virtue, will, in another, find reply,
as long as that love’s flame appears without;

so, from the time when Juvenal, descending
among us, in Hell’s Limbo, had made plain
the fondness that you felt for me, my own

benevolence toward you has been much richer
than any ever given to a person
one has not seen; thus, now these stairs seem short.

But tell me (and, as friend, forgive me if
excessive candor lets my reins relax,
and, as a friend, exchange your words with me):

how was it that you found within your breast
a place for avarice, when you possessed
the wisdom you had nurtured with such care?”

These words at first brought something of a smile
to Statius; then he answered: “Every word
you speak, to me is a dear sign of love.

Indeed, because true causes are concealed,
we often face deceptive reasoning
and things provoke perplexity in us.

Your question makes me sure that you’re convinced—
perhaps because my circle was the fifth—
that, in the life I once lived, avarice

had been my sin. Know then that I was far
from avarice—it was my lack of measure
thousands of months have punished. And if I

had not corrected my assessment by
my understanding what your verses meant
when you, as if enraged by human nature,

exclaimed: ‘Why cannot you, o holy hunger
for gold, restrain the appetite of mortals?’—
I’d now, while rolling weights, know sorry jousts.

Then I became aware that hands might open
too wide, like wings, in spending; and of this,
as of my other sins, I did repent.

How many are to rise again with heads
cropped close, whom ignorance prevents from reaching
repentance in—and at the end of—life!

And know that when a sin is countered by
another fault—directly opposite”
to it—then, here, both sins see their green wither.

Thus, I join those who pay for avarice
in my purgation, though what brought me here
was prodigality—its opposite.”

“Now, when you sang the savage wars of those
twin sorrows of Jocasta,” said the singer
of the bucolic poems, “it does not seem—

from those notes struck by you and Clio there—
that you had yet turned faithful to the faith
without which righteous works do not suffice.

If that is so, then what sun or what candles
drew you from darkness so that, in their wake,
you set your sails behind the fisherman?”

And he to him: “You were the first to send me
to drink within Parnassus’ caves and you,
the first who, after God, enlightened me.

You did as he who goes by night and carries
the lamp behind him—he is of no help
to his own self but teaches those who follow—

when you declared: ‘The ages are renewed;
justice and man’s first time on earth return;
from Heaven a new progeny descends.’

Through you I was a poet and, through you,
a Christian; but that you may see more plainly,
I’ll set my hand to color what I sketch.

Disseminated by the messengers
of the eternal kingdom, the true faith
by then had penetrated all the world,

and the new preachers preached in such accord
with what you’d said (and I have just repeated),
that I was drawn into frequenting them.

Then they appeared to me to be so saintly
that, when Domitian persecuted them,
my own laments accompanied their grief;

and while I could—as long as I had life—
I helped them, and their honest practices
made me disdainful of all other sects.

Before—within my poem—I’d led the Greeks
unto the streams of Thebes, I was baptized;
but out of fear, I was a secret Christian

and, for a long time, showed myself as pagan;
for this halfheartedness, for more than
four centuries, I circled the fourth circle.

And now may you, who lifted up the lid
that hid from me the good of which I speak,
while time is left us as we climb, tell me

where is our ancient Terence, and Caecilius
and Plautus, where is Varius, if you know;
tell me if they are damned, and in what quarter.”

“All these and Persius, I, and many others,”
my guide replied, “are with that Greek to whom
the Muses gave their gifts in greatest measure.

Our place is the blind prison, its first circle;
and there we often talk about the mountain
where those who were our nurses always dwell.

Euripides is with us, Antiphon,
Simonides, and Agathon, as well
as many other Greeks who once wore laurel

upon their brow; and there—of your own people—
one sees Antigone, Deiphyle,
Ismene, sad still, Argia as she was.

There one can see the woman who showed Langia,
and there, Tiresias’ daughter; there is Thetis; 
and, with her sisters, there, Deidamia.”

Both poets now were silent, once again
intent on their surroundings— they were free
 of stairs and walls; with day’s first four handmaidens

already left behind, and with the fifth
guiding the chariot-pole and lifting it, 
so that its horn of flame rose always higher,

my master said: “I think it’s time that we
turn our right shoulders toward the terrace edge, 
circling the mountain in the way we’re used to.”

In this way habit served us as a banner;
and when we chose that path, our fear was less
 because that worthy soul gave his assent.

Those two were in the lead; I walked alone,
behind them, listening to their colloquy, 
which taught me much concerning poetry.

But their delightful conversation soon
was interrupted by a tree that blocked 
our path; its fruits were fine, their scent was sweet,

and even as a fir-tree tapers upward
from branch to branch, that tree there tapered downward,
so as— I think— to ward off any climber.

Upon our left, where wall enclosed our path,
bright running water fell from the high rock 
and spread itself upon the leaves above.

When the two poets had approached the tree,
a voice emerging from within the leave
s cried out: “This food shall be denied to you.”

Then it cried: “ Mary’s care was for the marriage-
feast’s being seemly and complete, not for
 her mouth (which now would intercede for you).

And when they drank, of old, the Roman women
were satisfied with water; and young Daniel,
 through his disdain of food, acquired wisdom.

The first age was as fair as gold: when hungry,
men found the taste of acorns good; when thirsty, 
they found that every little stream was nectar.

When he was in the wilderness, the Baptist
had fed on nothing more than honey, locusts: 
for this he was made great, as glorious

as, in the Gospel, is made plain to you.”