Our talking did not slow our pace, our pace
not slow our talking; but conversing, we
moved quickly, like a boat a fair wind drives.

And recognizing that I was alive,
the shades—they seemed to be things twice dead—drew
amazement from the hollows of their eyes.

And I, continuing my telling, added:
“Perhaps he is more slow in his ascent
than he would be had he not met the other.

But tell me, if you can: where is Piccarda?
And tell me if, among those staring at me,
I can see any person I should note.”

“My sister—and I know not whether she
was greater in her goodness or her beauty—
on high Olympus is in triumph; she

rejoices in her crown already,” he
began, then added: “It is not forbidden
to name each shade here—abstinence has eaten

away our faces.” And he pointed: “This
is Bonagiunta, Bonagiunta da
Lucca; the one beyond him, even more

emaciated than the rest, had clasped
the Holy Church; he was from Tours; his fast
purges Bolsena’s eels, Vernaccia’s wine.”

And he named many others, one by one,
and, at their naming, they all seemed content;
so that—for this—no face was overcast.

I saw-their teeth were biting emptiness—
both Ubaldin da la Pila and Boniface,
who shepherded so many with his staff.

I saw Messer Marchese, who once had
more ease, less dryness, drinking at Forli
and yet could never satisfy his thirst.

But just as he who looks and then esteems
one more than others, so did I prize him
of Lucca, for he seemed to know me better.

He murmured; something like “Gentucca” was
what I heard from the place where he could feel
the wound of justice that denudes them so.

“O soul,” I said, “who seems so eager to
converse with me, do speak so that I hear you,
for speech may satisfy both you and me.”

He answered: “Although men condemn my city,
there is a woman born—she wears no veil
as yet-because of whom you’ll find it pleasing.

You are to journey with this prophecy;
and if there’s something in my murmuring
you doubt, events themselves will bear me out.

But tell me if the man whom I see here
is he who brought the new rhymes forth, beginning:
‘Ladies who have intelligence of love.'”

I answered: “I am one who, when Love breathes
in me, takes note; what he, within, dictates,
I, in that way, without, would speak and shape.”

“O brother, now I see,” he said, “the knot
that kept the Notary, Guittone, and me
short of the sweet new manner that I hear.

I clearly see how your pens follow closely
behind him who dictates, and certainly
that did not happen with our pens; and he

who sets himself to ferreting profoundly
can find no other difference between
the two styles.” He fell still, contentedly.

Even as birds that winter on the Nile
at times will slow and form a flock in air,
then speed their flight and form a file, so all

the people who were mere moved much more swiftly,
turning away their faces, hurrying
their pace because of leanness and desire.

And just as he who’s tired of running lets
his comrades go ahead and slows his steps
until he’s eased the panting of his chest,

so did Forese let the holy flock
pass by and move, behind, with me, saying:
“How long before I shall see you again?”

“I do not know,” I said, “how long I’ll live;
and yet, however quick is my return,
my longing for these shores would have me here

sooner—because the place where I was set
to live is day by day deprived of good
and seems along the way to wretched ruin.”

“Do not be vexed,” he said, “for I can see
the guiltiest of all dragged by a beast’s
tail to the valley where no sin is purged.

At every step the beast moves faster, always
gaining momentum, till it smashes him
and leaves his body squalidly undone.

Those wheels,” and here he looked up at the sky,
“do not have long to turn before you see
plainly what I can’t tell more openly.

Now you remain behind, for time is costly
here in this kingdom; I should lose too much
by moving with you thus, at equal pace.”

Just as a horseman sometimes gallops out,
leaving behind his troop of riders, so
that he may gain the honor of the first

clash—so, with longer strides, did he leave us;
and I remained along my path with those
two who were such great marshals of the world.

And when he’d gone so far ahead of us
that my eyes strained to follow him, just as
my mind was straining after what he’d said,

the branches of another tree, heavy
with fruit, alive with green, appeared to me
nearby, just past a curve where I had turned.

Beneath the tree I saw shades lifting hands,
crying I know not what up toward the branches,
like little eager, empty—headed children,

who beg—but he of whom they beg does not
reply, but to provoke their longing, he
holds high, and does not hide, the thing they want.

Then they departed as if disabused;
and we—immediately—reached that great tree,
which turns aside so many prayers and tears.

“Continue on, but don’t draw close to it;
there is a tree above from which Eve ate,
and from that tree above, this plant was raised.”

Among the boughs, a voice—I know not whose—
spoke so; thus, drawing closer, Virgil, Statius,
and I edged on, along the side that rises.

It said: “Remember those with double chests,
the miserable ones, born of the clouds,
whom Theseus battled when they’d gorged themselves;

and those whom Gideon refused as comrades—
those Hebrews who had drunk too avidly—
when he came down the hills to Midian.”

So, keeping close to one of that road’s margins,
we moved ahead, hearing of gluttony—
its sins repaid by sorry penalties.

Then, with more space along the lonely path,
a thousand steps and more had brought us forward,
each of us meditating wordlessly.

“What are you thinking of, you three who walk
alone?” a sudden voice called out; at which
I started—like a scared young animal.

I raised my head to see who it might be;
no glass or metal ever seen within
a furnace was so glowing or so red

as one I saw, who said: “If you’d ascend,
then you must turn at this point; for whoever
would journey unto peace must pass this way.”

But his appearance had deprived me of
my sight, so that—as one who uses hearing
as guide—I turned and followed my two teachers.

And like the breeze of May that-heralding
the dawning of the day—when it is steeped
in flowers and in grass, stirs fragrantly,

so did I feel the wind that blew against
the center of my brow, and clearly sensed
the movement of his wings, the air’s ambrosia.

And then I heard: “Blessed are those whom grace
illumines so, that, in their breasts, the love
of taste does not awake too much desire—

whose hungering is always in just measure.”