Now keen to search within, to search around
that forest—dense, alive with green, divine—
which tempered the new day before my eyes,

without delay, I left behind the rise
and took the plain, advancing slowly, slowly
across the ground where every part was fragrant.

A gentle breeze, which did not seem to vary
within itself, was striking at my brow
but with no greater force than a kind wind’s,

a wind that made the trembling boughs—they all
bent eagerly—incline in the direction
of morning shadows from the holy mountain;

but they were not deflected with such force
as to disturb the little birds upon
the branches in the practice of their arts;

for to the leaves, with song, birds welcomed those
first hours of the morning joyously,
and leaves supplied the burden to their rhymes—

just like the wind that sounds from branch to branch
along the shore of Classe, through the pines
when Aeolus has set Sirocco loose.

Now, though my steps were slow, I’d gone so far
into the ancient forest that I could
no longer see where I had made my entry;

and there I came upon a stream that blocked
the path of my advance; its little waves
bent to the left the grass along its banks.

All of the purest waters here on earth,
when matched against that stream, would seem to be
touched by impurity; it hides no thing—

that stream—although it moves, dark, dark, beneath
the never—ending shadows, which allow
no ray of sun or moon to reach those waters.

I halted, and I set my eyes upon
the farther bank, to look at the abundant
variety of newly—flowered boughs;

and there, just like a thing that, in appearing
most suddenly, repels all other thoughts,
so great is the astonishment it brings,

I saw a solitary woman moving,
singing, and gathering up flower on flower—
the flowers that colored all of her pathway.

“I pray you, lovely lady, you who warm
yourself with rays of love, if I may trust
your looks—which often evidence the heart—

may it please you,” I asked of her, “to move
ahead and closer to this river, so
that I may understand what you are singing.

You have reminded me of where and what—
just when her mother was deprived of her
and she deprived of spring—Proserpina was.”

As, when she turns, a woman, dancing, keeps
her soles close to the ground and to each other
and scarcely lets one foot precede the other,

so did she turn, upon the little red
and yellow flowers, to me, no differently
than would a virgin, lowering chaste eyes.

I had beseeched, and I was satisfied,
for she approached so close that the sweet sound
that reached me then became intelligible.

No sooner had she reached the point where that
fair river’s waves could barely bathe the grass,
than she gave me this gift: lifting her eyes.

I do not think a light so bright had shone
beneath the lids of Venus when her son
pierced her in extraordinary fashion.

Erect, along the farther bank, she smiled,
her hands entwining varicolored flowers,
which that high land, needing no seed, engenders.

The river kept us just three steps apart;
but even Hellespont, where Xerxes crossed—
a case that still curbs all men’s arrogance—

did not provoke more hatred in Leander
when rough seas ran from Abydos to Sestos,
than hatred I bestowed upon that river

when it refused to open. She began:
“You are new here and may—because I smile
in this place, chosen to be mankind’s nest—

wonder, perplexed, unable to detect
the cause; but light to clear your intellect
is in the psalm beginning ‘Delectasti.’

And you, who have stepped forward, who beseeched me,
tell me if you’d hear more; I have come ready
for all your questions till you’re satisfied.”

I said: “The water and the murmuring forest
contend, in me, against the recent credence
I gave to words denying their existence.”

At this, she said: “I’ll tell you how the source
of your amazement has its special cause;
I’ll clear the cloud that’s left you so distraught.

The Highest Good, whose sole joy is Himself,
made man to be—and to enact—good; He
gave man this place as pledge of endless peace.

Man’s fault made brief his stay here; and man’s fault
made him exchange frank laughter and sweet sport
for lamentation and for anxiousness.

Below this mountain, land and water vapors,
which follow heat as far as they are able,
produce their perturbations; to prevent

them from molesting man placed here, this mountain
rose up this close to Heaven; from the point
where its gate locks, it’s free of such disturbance.

Now, since all of the atmosphere revolves
within a circle, moved by the first circling,
unless its round is broken at some point,

against this height, which stands completely free
within the living air, that motion strikes;
and since these woods are dense, they echo it.

And when a plant is struck, its power is such
that it impregnates air with seeding force;
the air, revolving, casts this seed abroad;

the other hemisphere, depending on
the nature of its land and sky, conceives
and bears, from diverse powers, diverse trees.

If what I’ve said were known, you would not need
to be amazed on earth when growing things
take root but have no seed that can be seen.

And you must know: the holy plain on which
you find yourself is full of every seed;
and it has fruit that—there—cannot be gathered.

The water that you see does not spring from
a vein that vapor—cold—condensed—restores,
like rivers that acquire or lose their force;

it issues from a pure and changeless fountain,
which by the will of God regains as much
as, on two sides, it pours and it divides.

On this side it descends with power to end
one’s memory of sin; and on the other,
it can restore recall of each good deed.

To one side, it is Lethe; on the other,
Eunoe; neither stream is efficacious
unless the other’s waters have been tasted:

their savor is above all other sweetness.
Although your thirst might well be satisfied
even if I revealed no more to you,

I’ll give you freely, too, a corollary;
nor do I think my words will be less welcome
to you if they extend beyond my promise.

Those ancients who in poetry presented
the golden age, who sang its happy state,
perhaps, in their Parnassus, dreamt this place.

Here, mankind’s root was innocent; and here
were every fruit and never—ending spring;
these streams—the nectar of which poets sing.”

Then I turned round completely, and I faced
my poets; I could see that they had heard
with smiles this final corollary spoken;

that done, my eyes returned to the fair woman.