Her words were done, but without interruption
she sang—like an enamored woman—thus:
“Beati quorum tecta sunt peccata!”

And just as nymphs who used to walk alone
among the woodland shadows, some desiring
to see and some to flee the sun, so she

moved countercurrent as she walked along
the riverbank; and following her short
footsteps with my own steps, I matched her pace.

Her steps and mine together did not sum
one hundred when the banks, still parallel,
so curved about that I was facing east.

Nor had we gone much farther on that path
when she turned fully round toward me and said:
“My brother, look and listen”; and I saw

a sudden radiance that swept across
the mighty forest on all sides—and I
was wondering if lightning had not struck.

But since, when lightning strikes, it stops at once,
while that light, lingering, increased its force,
within my mind I asked: “What thing is this?”

And through the incandescent air there ran
sweet melody; at which, just indignation
made me rebuke the arrogance of Eve

because, where earth and heaven were obedient,
a solitary woman, just created,
found any veil at all beyond endurance;

if she had been devout beneath her veil,
I should have savored those ineffable
delights before, and for a longer time.

While I moved on, completely rapt, among
so many first fruits of eternal pleasure,
and longing for still greater joys, the air

before us altered underneath the green
branches, becoming like an ardent fire,
and now the sweet sound was distinctly song.

O Virgins, sacrosanct, if I have ever,
for your sake, suffered vigils, cold, and hunger,
great need makes me entreat my recompense.

Now Helicon must pour its fountains for me,
Urania must help me with her choir
to put in verses things hard to conceive.

Not far beyond, we made out seven trees
of gold, though the long stretch of air between
those trees and us had falsified their semblance;

but when I’d drawn so close that things perceived
through mingled senses, which delude, did not,
now they were nearer, lose their real features,

the power that offers reason matter judged
those trees to be—what they were—candelabra,
and what those voices sang to be “Hosanna.”

The upper part of those fair candles flamed
more radiantly than the midmonth moon
shines at midnight in an untroubled sky.

Full of astonishment, I turned to my
good Virgil; but he only answered me
with eyes that were no less amazed than mine.

Then I looked at the extraordinary
things that were moving toward us—but so slowly
that even brides just wed would move more quickly.

The woman chided me: “Why are you only
so eager to behold the living lights
and not in seeing what comes after them?”

Then I saw people following those candles,
as if behind their guides, and they wore white—
whiteness that, in this world, has never been.

The water, to my left, reflected flames,
and it reflected, too, my left—hand side
if I gazed into it, as in a mirror.

When I was at a point along my shore
where all that sundered me from them was water,
I stayed my steps in order to see better,

and I could see the candle flames move forward,
leaving the air behind them colored like
the strokes a painter’s brush might have described,

so that the air above that retinue
was streaked with seven bands in every hue
of which the rainbow’s made and Delia’s girdle.

These pennants stretched far back, beyond my vision;
as for the width they filled, I judged the distance
between the outer ones to be ten paces.

Beneath the handsome sky I have described,
twenty—four elders moved on, two by two,
and they had wreaths of lilies on their heads.

And all were singing: “You, among the daughters
of Adam, benedicta are; and may
your beauties blessed be eternally.”

After the flowers and the other fresh
plants facing me, along the farther shore,
had seen those chosen people disappear,

then—as in heaven, star will follow star—
the elders gone, four animals came on;
and each of them had green leaves as his crown;

each had six wings as plumage, and those plumes
were full of eyes; they would be very like
the eyes of Argus, were his eyes alive.

Reader, I am not squandering more rhymes
in order to describe their forms; since I
must spend elsewhere, I can’t be lavish here;

but read Ezekiel, for he has drawn
those animals approaching from the north;
with wings and cloud and fire, he painted them.

And just as you will find them in his pages,
such were they here, except that John’s with me
as to their wings; with him, John disagrees.

The space between the four of them contained
a chariot—triumphal—on two wheels,
tied to a griffin’s neck and drawn by him.

His wings, stretched upward, framed the middle band
with three bands on each outer side, so that,
though he cleaved air, he left the bands intact.

His wings—so high that they were lost to sight;
his limbs were gold as far as he was bird;
the rest of him was white mixed with bloodred.

Not only did no chariot so handsome
gladden Rome’s Africanus or Augustus
himself—even the Sun’s own cannot match it;

the Sun’s—which, gone astray, was burnt to cinders
because Earth offered up her pious prayers,
when Jove, in ways not known to us, was just.

Three circling women, then advancing, danced:
at the right wheel; the first of them, so red
that even in a flame she’d not be noted;

the second seemed as if her flesh and bone
were fashioned out of emerald; the third
seemed to be newly fallen snow. And now

the white one seemed to lead them, now the red;
and from the way in which the leader chanted,
the others took their pace, now slow, now rapid.

Upon the left, four other women, dressed
in crimson, danced, depending on the cadence
of one of them, with three eyes in her head.

Behind all of the group I have described
I saw two elders, different in their dress
but like in manner—grave and decorous.

The first seemed to be one of the disciples
of great Hippocrates, whom nature made
for those who are her dearest living beings;

the other showed an opposite concern—
his sword was bright and sharp, and even on
this near side of the river, I felt fear.

Then I saw four of humble aspect; and,
when all the rest had passed, a lone old man,
his features keen, advanced, as if in sleep.

The clothes these seven wore were like the elders’
in the first file, except that these had no
garlands of lilies round their brow; instead,

roses and other red flowers wreathed their heads;
one seeing them less closely would have sworn
that all of them had flames above their eyebrows.

And when the chariot stood facing me,
I heard a bolt of thunder; and it seemed
to block the path of that good company,

which halted there, its emblems in the lead.