To course across more kindly waters now
my talent’s little vessel lifts her sails,
leaving behind herself a sea so cruel;

and what I sing will be that second kingdom,
in which the human soul is cleansed of sin,
becoming worthy of ascent to Heaven.

But here, since I am yours, o holy Muses,
may this poem rise again from Hell’s dead realm;
and may Calliope rise somewhat here,

accompanying my singing with that music
whose power struck the poor Pierides
so forcefully that they despaired of pardon.

The gentle hue of oriental sapphire
in which the sky’s serenity was steeped—
its aspect pure as far as the horizon—

brought back my joy in seeing just as soon
as I had left behind the air of death
that had afflicted both my sight and breast.

The lovely planet that is patroness
of love made all the eastern heavens glad,
veiling the Pisces in the train she led.

Then I turned to the right, setting my mind
upon the other pole, and saw four stars
not seen before except by the first people.

Heaven appeared to revel in their flames:
o northern hemisphere, because you were
denied that sight, you are a widower!

After my eyes took leave of those four stars,
turning a little toward the other pole,
from which the Wain had disappeared by now,

I saw a solitary patriarch
near me—his aspect worthy of such reverence
that even son to father owes no more.

His beard was long and mixed with white, as were
the hairs upon his head; and his hair spread
down to his chest in a divided tress.

The rays of the four holy stars so framed
his face with light that in my sight he seemed
like one who is confronted by the sun.

“Who are you—who, against the hidden river,
were able to escape the eternal prison?”
he said, moving those venerable plumes.

“Who was your guide? What served you both as lantern
when, from the deep night that will always keep
the hellish valley dark, you were set free?

The laws of the abyss—have they been broken?
Or has a new, a changed decree in Heaven
let you, though damned, approach my rocky slopes?”

My guide took hold of me decisively;
by way of words and hands and other signs,
he made my knees and brow show reverence.

Then he replied: “I do not come through my
own self. There was a lady sent from Heaven;
her pleas led me to help and guide this man.

But since your will would have a far more full
and accurate account of our condition,
my will cannot withhold what you request.

This man had yet to see his final evening;
but, through his folly, little time was left
before he did—he was so close to it.

As I have told you, I was sent to him
for his deliverance; the only road
I could have taken was the road I took.

I showed him all the people of perdition;
now I intend to show to him those spirits
who, in your care, are bent on expiation.

To tell you how I led him would take long;
it is a power descending from above
that helps me guide him here, to see and hear you.

Now may it please you to approve his coming;
he goes in search of liberty—so precious,
as he who gives his life for it must know.

You know it—who, in Utica, found death
for freedom was not bitter, when you left
the garb that will be bright on the great day.

Eternal edicts are not broken for us;
this man’s alive, and I’m not bound by Minos;
but I am from the circle where the chaste

eyes of your Marcia are; and she still prays
to you, o holy breast, to keep her as
your own: for her love, then, incline to us.

Allow our journey through your seven realms.
I shall thank her for kindness you bestow—
if you would let your name be named below.”

“While I was there, within the other world,
Marcia so pleased my eyes,” he then replied,
“each kindness she required, I satisfied.

Now that she dwells beyond the evil river,
she has no power to move me any longer,
such was the law decreed when I was freed.

But if a lady come from Heaven speeds
and helps you, as you say, there is no need
of flattery; it is enough, indeed,

to ask me for her sake. Go then; but first
wind a smooth rush around his waist and bathe
his face, to wash away all of Hell’s stains;

for it would not be seemly to approach
with eyes still dimmed by any mists, the first
custodian angel, one from Paradise.

This solitary island, all around
its very base, there where the breakers pound,
bears rushes on its soft and muddy ground.

There is no other plant that lives below:
no plant with leaves or plant that, as it grows,
hardens—and breaks beneath the waves’ harsh blows.

That done, do not return by this same pass;
the sun, which rises now, will show you how
this hillside can be climbed more easily.”

With that he vanished; and without a word,
I rose and drew in closer to my guide,
and it was on him that I set my eyes.

And he began: “Son, follow in my steps;
let us go back; this is the point at which
the plain slopes down to reach its lowest bounds.”

Daybreak was vanquishing the dark’s last hour,
which fled before it; in the distance, I
could recognize the trembling of the sea.

We made our way across the lonely plain,
like one returning to a lost pathway,
who, till he finds it, seems to move in vain.

When we had reached the point where dew contends
with sun and, under sea winds, in the shade,
wins out because it won’t evaporate,

my master gently placed both of his hands—
outspread—upon the grass; therefore, aware
of what his gesture and intention were,

I reached and offered him my tear—stained cheeks;
and on my cheeks, he totally revealed
the color that Inferno had concealed.

Then we arrived at the deserted shore,
which never yet had seen its waters coursed
by any man who journeyed back again.

There, just as pleased another, he girt me.
O wonder! Where he plucked the humble plant
that he had chosen, there that plant sprang up

again, identical, immediately.