When I had crossed the threshold of the gate
that—since the soul’s aberrant love would make
the crooked way seem straight—is seldom used,

I heard the gate resound and, hearing, knew
that it had shut; and if I’d turned toward it,
how could my fault have found a fit excuse?

Our upward pathway ran between cracked rocks;
they seemed to sway in one, then the other part,
just like a wave that flees, then doubles back.

“Here we shall need some ingenuity,”
my guide warned me, “as both of us draw near
this side or that side where the rock wall veers.”

This made our steps so slow and hesitant
that the declining moon had reached its bed
to sink back into rest, before we had

made our way through that needle’s eye; but when
we were released from it, in open space
above, a place at which the slope retreats,

I was exhausted; with the two of us
uncertain of our way, we halted on
a plateau lonelier than desert paths.

The distance from its edge, which rims the void,
in to the base of the steep slope, which climbs
and climbs, would measure three times one man’s body;

and for as far as my sight took its flight,
now to the left, now to the right—hand side,
that terrace seemed to me equally wide.

There we had yet to let our feet advance
when I discovered that the bordering bank—
less sheer than banks of other terraces—

was of white marble and adorned with carvings
so accurate—not only Polycletus
but even Nature, there, would feel defeated.

The angel who reached earth with the decree
of that peace which, for many years, had been
invoked with tears, the peace that opened Heaven

after long interdict, appeared before us,
his gracious action carved with such precision—
he did not seem to be a silent image.

One would have sworn that he was saying, “Ave”;
for in that scene there was the effigy
of one who turned the key that had unlocked

the highest love; and in her stance there were
impressed these words, “Ecce ancilla Dei,”
precisely like a figure stamped in wax.

“Your mind must not attend to just one part,”
the gentle master said—he had me on
the side of him where people have their heart.

At this, I turned my face and saw beyond
the form of Mary—on the side where stood
the one who guided me—another story

engraved upon the rock; therefore I moved
past Virgil and drew close to it, so that
the scene before my eyes was more distinct.

There, carved in that same marble, were the cart
and oxen as they drew the sacred ark,
which makes men now fear tasks not in their charge.

People were shown in front; and all that group,
divided into seven choirs, made
two of my senses speak—one sense said, “No,”

the other said, “Yes, they do sing”; just so,
about the incense smoke shown there, my nose
and eyes contended, too, with yes and no.

And there the humble psalmist went before
the sacred vessel, dancing, lifting up
his robe—he was both less and more than king.

Facing that scene, and shown as at the window
of a great palace, Michal watched as would
a woman full of scorn and suffering.

To look more closely at another carving,
which I saw gleaming white beyond Michal,
my feet moved past the point where I had stood.

And there the noble action of a Roman
prince was presented—he whose worth had urged
on Gregory to his great victory—

I mean the Emperor Trajan; and a poor
widow was near his bridle, and she stood
even as one in tears and sadness would.

Around him, horsemen seemed to press and crowd;
above their heads, on golden banners, eagles
were represented, moving in the wind.

Among that crowd, the miserable woman
seemed to be saying: “Lord, avenge me for
the slaying of my son—my heart is broken.”

And he was answering: “Wait now until
I have returned.” And she, as one in whom
grief presses urgently: “And, lord, if you

do not return?” And he: “The one who’ll be
in my place will perform it for you.” She:
“What good can others’ goodness do for you

if you neglect your own?” He: “Be consoled;
my duty shall be done before I go:
so justice asks, so mercy makes me stay.”

This was the speech made visible by One
within whose sight no thing is new—but we,
who lack its likeness here, find novelty.

While I took much delight in witnessing
these effigies of true humility—
dear, too, to see because He was their Maker—

the poet murmured: “See the multitude
advancing, though with slow steps, on this side:
they will direct us to the higher stairs.”

My eyes, which had been satisfied in seeking
new sights—a thing for which they long—did not
delay in turning toward him. But I would

not have you, reader, be deflected from
your good resolve by hearing from me now
how God would have us pay the debt we owe.

Don’t dwell upon the form of punishment:
consider what comes after that; at worst
it cannot last beyond the final Judgment.

“Master,” I said, “what I see moving toward us
does not appear to me like people, but
I can’t tell what is there—my sight’s bewildered.”

And he to me: “Whatever makes them suffer
their heavy torment bends them to the ground;
at first I was unsure of what they were.

But look intently there, and let your eyes
unravel what’s beneath those stones: you can
already see what penalty strikes each.”

O Christians, arrogant, exhausted, wretched,
whose intellects are sick and cannot see,
who place your confidence in backward steps,

do you not know that we are worms and born
to form the angelic butterfly that soars,
without defenses, to confront His judgment?

Why does your mind presume to flight when you
are still like the imperfect grub, the worm
before it has attained its final form?

Just as one sees at times—as corbel for
support of ceiling or of roof—a figure
with knees drawn up into its chest (and this

oppressiveness, unreal, gives rise to real
distress in him who watches it): such was
the state of those I saw when I looked hard.

They were indeed bent down—some less, some more—
according to the weights their backs now bore;
and even he whose aspect showed most patience,

in tears, appeared to say: “I can no more.”