“Our Father, You who dwell within the heavens-
 but are not circumscribed by them-out of
 Your greater love for Your first works above,

 praised be Your name and Your omnipotence,
 by every creature, just as it is seemly
 to offer thanks to Your sweet effluence.

 Your kingdom’s peace come unto us, for if
 it does not come, then though we summon all
 our force, we cannot reach it of our selves.

 Just as Your angels, as they sing Hosanna,
 offer their wills to You as sacrifice,
 so may men offer up their wills to You.

 Give unto us this day the daily manna
 without which he who labors most to move
 ahead through this harsh wilderness falls back.

 Even as we forgive all who have done
 us injury, may You, benevolent,
 forgive, and do not judge us by our worth.

 Try not our strength, so easily subdued,
 against the ancient foe, but set it free
 from him who goads it to perversity.

 This last request we now address to You,
 dear Lord, not for ourselves-who have no need-
 but for the ones whom we have left behind.”

 Beseeching, thus, good penitence for us
 and for themselves, those shades moved on beneath
 their weights, like those we sometimes bear in dreams-

 each in his own degree of suffering
 but all, exhausted, circling the first terrace,
 purging themselves of this world’s scoriae.

 If there they pray on our behalf, what can
 be said and done here on this earth for them
 by those whose wills are rooted in true worth?

 Indeed we should help them to wash away
 the stains they carried from this world, so that,
 made pure and light, they reach the starry wheels.

 “Ah, so may justice and compassion soon
 unburden you, so that your wings may move
 as you desire them to, and uplift you,

 show us on which hand lies the shortest path
 to reach the stairs; if there is more than one
 passage, then show us that which is less steep;

 for he who comes with me, because he wears
 the weight of Adam’s flesh as dress, despite
 his ready will, is slow in his ascent.”

 These words, which had been spoken by my guide,
 were answered by still other words we heard;
 for though it was not clear who had replied,

 an answer came: “Come with us to the right
 along the wall of rock, and you will find
 a pass where even one alive can climb.

 And were I not impeded by the stone
 that, since it has subdued my haughty neck,
 compels my eyes to look below, then I

 should look at this man who is still alive
 and nameless, to see if I recognize
 him-and to move his pity for my burden.

 I was Italian, son of a great Tuscan:
 my father was Guiglielmo Aldobrandesco;
 I do not know if you have heard his name.

 The ancient blood and splendid deeds of my
 forefathers made me so presumptuous
 that, without thinking on our common mother,

 I scorned all men past measure, and that scorn
 brought me my death-the Sienese know how,
 as does each child in Campagnatico.

 I am Omberto; and my arrogance
 has not harmed me alone, for it has drawn
 all of my kin into calamity.

 Until God has been satisfied, I bear
 this burden here among the dead because
 I did not bear this load among the living.”

 My face was lowered as I listened; and
 one of those souls-not he who’d spoken-twisted
 himself beneath the weight that burdened them;

 he saw and knew me and called out to me,
 fixing his eyes on me laboriously
 as I, completely hunched, walked on with them.

 “Oh,” I cried out, “are you not Oderisi,
 glory of Gubbio, glory of that art
 they call illumination now in Paris?”

 “Brother,” he said, “the pages painted by
 the brush of Franco Bolognese smile
 more brightly: all the glory now is his;

 mine, but a part. In truth I would have been
 less gracious when I lived-so great was that
 desire for eminence which drove my heart.

 For such pride, here one pays the penalty;
 and I’d not be here yet, had it not been
 that, while I still could sin, I turned to Him.

 O empty glory of the powers of humans!
 How briefly green endures upon the peak-
 unless an age of dullness follows it.

 In painting Cimabue thought he held
 the field, and now it’s Giotto they acclaim-
 the former only keeps a shadowed fame.

 So did one Guido, from the other, wrest
 the glory of our tongue-and he perhaps
 is born who will chase both out of the nest.

 Worldly renown is nothing other than
 a breath of wind that blows now here, now there,
 and changes name when it has changed its course.

 Before a thousand years have passed-a span
 that, for eternity, is less space than
 an eyeblink for the slowest sphere in heaven-

 would you find greater glory if you left
 your flesh when it was old than if your death
 had come before your infant words were spent?

 All Tuscany acclaimed his name-the man
 who moves so slowly on the path before me,
 and now they scarcely whisper of him even

 in Siena, where he lorded it when they
 destroyed the raging mob of Florence-then
 as arrogant as now it’s prostitute.

 Your glory wears the color of the grass
 that comes and goes; the sun that makes it wither
 first drew it from the ground, still green and tender.”

 And I to him: “Your truthful speech has filled
 my soul with sound humility, abating
 my overswollen pride; but who is he

 of whom you spoke now?” “Provenzan Salvani,
 he answered, “here because-presumptuously-”
 he thought his grip could master all Siena.

 So he has gone, and so he goes, with no
 rest since his death; this is the penalty
 exacted from those who-there-overreached.”

 And I: “But if a spirit who awaits
 the edge of life before repenting must-
 unless good prayers help him-stay below

 and not ascend here for as long a time
 as he had spent alive, do tell me how
 Salvani’s entry here has been allowed.”

 “When he was living in his greatest glory”
 said he, “then of his own free will he set
 aside all shame and took his place upon

 the Campo of Siena; there, to free
 his friend from suffering in Charles’s prison,
 humbling himself, he trembled in each vein.

 I say no more; I know I speak obscurely;
 but soon enough you’ll find your neighbor’s acts
 are such that what I say can be explained.

 This deed delivered him from those confines.”