We now had reached the summit of the stairs
where once again the mountain whose ascent
delivers man from sin has been indented.

There, just as in the case of the first terrace,
a second terrace runs around the slope,
except that it describes a sharper arc.

No effigy is there and no outline:
the bank is visible, the naked path—
only the livid color of raw rock.

“If we wait here in order to inquire
of those who pass,” the poet said, “I fear
our choice of path may be delayed too long.”

And then he fixed his eyes upon the sun;
letting his right side serve to guide his movement,
he wheeled his left around and changed direction.

“O gentle light, through trust in which I enter
on this new path, may you conduct us here,”
he said, “for men need guidance in this place.

You warm the world and you illumine it;
unless a higher Power urge us elsewhere,
your rays must always be the guides that lead.”

We had already journeyed there as far
as we should reckon here to be a mile,
and done it in brief time—our will was eager—

when we heard spirits as they flew toward us,
though they could not be seen—spirits pronouncing
courteous invitations to love’s table.

The first voice that flew by called out aloud:
“Vinum non habent,” and behind us that
same voice reiterated its example.

And as that voice drew farther off, before
it faded finally, another cried:
“I am Orestes.” It, too, did not stop.

“What voices are these, father?” were my words;
and as I asked him this, I heard a third
voice say: “Love those by whom you have been hurt.”

And my good master said: “The sin of envy
is scourged within this circle; thus, the cords
that form the scourging lash are plied by love.

The sounds of punished envy, envy curbed,
are different; if I judge right, you’ll hear
those sounds before we reach the pass of pardon.

But let your eyes be fixed attentively
and, through the air, you will see people seated
before us, all of them on the stone terrace.”

I opened—wider than before—my eyes;
I looked ahead of me, and I saw shades
with cloaks that shared their color with the rocks.

And once we’d moved a little farther on,
I heard the cry of, “Mary, pray for us,”
and then heard, “Michael,” “Peter,” and “All saints.”

I think no man now walks upon the earth
who is so hard that he would not have been
pierced by compassion for what I saw next;

for when I had drawn close enough to see
clearly the way they paid their penalty,
the force of grief pressed tears out of my eyes.

Those souls—it seemed—were cloaked in coarse haircloth;
another’s shoulder served each shade as prop,
and all of them were bolstered by the rocks:

so do the blind who have to beg appear
on pardon days to plead for what they need,
each bending his head back and toward the other,

that all who watch feel—quickly—pity’s touch
not only through the words that would entreat
but through the sight, which can—no less—beseech.

And just as, to the blind, no sun appears,
so to the shades—of whom I now speak—here,
the light of heaven would not give itself;

for iron wire pierces and sews up
the lids of all those shades, as untamed hawks
are handled, lest, too restless, they fly off.

It seemed to me a gross discourtesy
for me, going, to see and not be seen;
therefore, I turned to my wise counselor.

He knew quite well what I, though mute, had meant;
and thus he did not wait for my request,
but said: “Speak, and be brief and to the point.”

Virgil was to my right, along the outside,
nearer the terrace—edge—no parapet
was there to keep a man from falling off;

and to my other side were the devout
shades; through their eyes, sewn so atrociously,
those spirits forced the tears that bathed their cheeks.

I turned to them; and “You who can be certain,”
I then began, “of seeing that high light
which is the only object of your longing,

may, in your conscience, all impurity
soon be dissolved by grace, so that the stream
of memory flow through it limpidly;

tell me, for I shall welcome such dear words,
if any soul among you is Italian;
if I know that, then I—perhaps—can help him.”

“My brother, each of us is citizen
of one true city: what you meant to say
was ‘one who lived in Italy as pilgrim.'”

My hearing placed the point from which this answer
had come somewhat ahead of me; therefore,
I made myself heard farther on; moving,

I saw one shade among the rest who looked
expectant; and if any should ask how—
its chin was lifted as a blind man’s is.

“Spirit,” I said, “who have subdued yourself
that you may climb, if it is you who answered,
then let me know you by your place or name.”

“I was a Sienese,” she answered, “and
with others here I mend my wicked life,
weeping to Him that He grant us Himself.

I was not sapient, though I was called Sapia;
and I rejoiced far more at others’ hurts
than at my own good fortune. And lest you

should think I have deceived you, hear and judge
if I was not, as I have told you, mad
when my years’ arc had reached its downward part.

My fellow citizens were close to Colle,
where they’d joined battle with their enemies,
and I prayed God for that which He had willed.

There they were routed, beaten; they were reeling
along the bitter paths of flight; and seeing
that chase, I felt incomparable joy,

so that I lifted up my daring face
and cried to God: ‘Now I fear you no more!’—
as did the blackbird after brief fair weather.

I looked for peace with God at my life’s end;
the penalty I owe for sin would not
be lessened now by penitence had not

one who was sorrowing for me because
of charity in him—Pier Pettinaio—
remembered me in his devout petitions.

But who are you, who question our condition
as you move on, whose eyes—if I judge right—
have not been sewn, who uses breath to speak?”

“My eyes,” I said, “will be denied me here,
but only briefly; the offense of envy
was not committed often by their gaze.

I fear much more the punishment below;
my soul is anxious, in suspense; already
I feel the heavy weights of the first terrace.”

And she: “Who, then, led you up here among us,
if you believe you will return below?”
And I: “He who is with me and is silent.

I am alive; and therefore, chosen spirit,
if you would have me move my mortal steps
on your behalf, beyond, ask me for that.”

“Oh, this,” she answered, “is so strange a thing
to hear: the sign is clear—you have God’s love.
Thus, help me sometimes with your prayers. I ask

of you, by that which you desire most,
if you should ever tread the Tuscan earth,
to see my name restored among my kin.

You will see them among those vain ones who
have put their trust in Talamone (their loss
in hope will be more than Diana cost);

but there the admirals will lose the most.”