“Who is this man who, although death has yet
to grant him flight, can circle round our mountain,
and can, at will, open and shut his eyes?”

“I don’t know who he is, but I do know
he’s not alone; you’re closer; question him
and greet him gently, so that he replies.”

So were two spirits, leaning toward each other,
discussing me, along my right—hand side;
then they bent back their heads to speak to me,

and one began: “O soul who—still enclosed
within the body—make your way toward Heaven,
may you, through love, console us; tell us who

you are, from where you come; the grace that you’ve
received—a thing that’s never come to pass
before—has caused us much astonishment.”

And I: “Through central Tuscany there spreads
a little stream first born in Falterona;
one hundred miles can’t fill the course it needs.

I bring this body from that river’s banks;
to tell you who I am would be to speak
in vain—my name has not yet gained much fame.”

“If, with my understanding, I have seized
your meaning properly,” replied to me
the one who’d spoken first, “you mean the Arno.”

The other said to him: “Why did he hide
that river’s name, even as one would do
in hiding something horrible from view?”

The shade to whom this question was addressed
repaid with this: “I do not know; but it
is right for such a valley’s name to perish,

for from its source (at which the rugged chain—
from which Pelorus was cut off—surpasses
most other places with its mass of mountains)

until its end point (where it offers back
those waters that evaporating skies
drew from the sea, that streams may be supplied),

virtue is seen as serpent, and all flee
from it as if it were an enemy,
either because the site is ill—starred or

their evil custom goads them so; therefore,
the nature of that squalid valley’s people
has changed, as if they were in Circe’s pasture.

That river starts its miserable course
among foul hogs, more fit for acorns than
for food devised to serve the needs of man.

Then, as that stream descends, it comes on curs
that, though their force is feeble, snap and snarl;
scornful of them, it swerves its snout away.

And, downward, it flows on; and when that ditch,
ill—fated and accursed, grows wider, it
finds, more and more, the dogs becoming wolves.

Descending then through many dark ravines,
it comes on foxes so full of deceit—
there is no trap that they cannot defeat.

Nor will I keep from speech because my comrade
hears me (and it will serve you, too, to keep
in mind what prophecy reveals to me).

I see your grandson: he’s become a hunter
of wolves along the banks of the fierce river,
and he strikes every one of them with terror.

He sells their flesh while they are still alive;
then, like an ancient beast, he turns to slaughter,
depriving many of life, himself of honor.

Bloody, he comes out from the wood he’s plundered,
leaving it such that in a thousand years
it will not be the forest that it was.”

Just as the face of one who has heard word
of pain and injury becomes perturbed,
no matter from what side that menace stirs,

so did I see that other soul, who’d turned
to listen, growing anxious and dejected
when he had taken in his comrade’s words.

The speech of one, the aspect of the other
had made me need to know their names, and I
both queried and beseeched at the same time,

at which the spirit who had spoken first
to me began again: “You’d have me do
for you that which, to me, you have refused.

But since God would, in you, have His grace glow
so brightly, I shall not be miserly;
know, therefore, that I was Guido del Duca.

My blood was so afire with envy that,
when I had seen a man becoming happy,
the lividness in me was plain to see.

From what I’ve sown, this is the straw I reap:
o humankind, why do you set your hearts
there where our sharing cannot have a part?

This is Rinieri, this is he—the glory,
the honor of the house of Calboli;
but no one has inherited his worth.

It’s not his kin alone, between the Po
and mountains, and the Reno and the coast,
who’ve lost the truth’s grave good and lost the good

of gentle living, too; those lands are full
of poisoned stumps; by now, however much
one were to cultivate, it is too late.

Where is good Lizio? Arrigo Mainardi?
Pier Traversaro? Guido di Carpigna?
O Romagnoles returned to bastardy!

When will a Fabbro flourish in Bologna?
When, in Faenza, a Bernadin di Fosco,
the noble offshoot of a humble plant?

Don’t wonder, Tuscan, if I weep when I
remember Ugolino d’Azzo, one
who lived among us, and Guido da Prata,

the house of Traversara, of Anastagi
(both houses without heirs), and Federigo
Tignoso and his gracious company,

the ladies and the knights, labors and leisure
to which we once were urged by courtesy
and love, where hearts now host perversity.

O Bretinoro, why do you not flee—
when you’ve already lost your family
and many men who’ve fled iniquity?

Bagnacaval does well: it breeds no more—
and Castrocuro ill, and Conio worse,
for it insists on breeding counts so cursed.

Once freed of their own demon, the Pagani
will do quite well, but not so well that any
will testify that they are pure and worthy.

Your name, o Ugolin de’ Fantolini,
is safe, since one no longer waits for heirs
to blacken it with their degeneracy.

But, Tuscan, go your way; I am more pleased
to weep now than to speak: for that which we
have spoken presses heavily on me!”

We knew those gentle souls had heard us move
away; therefore, their silence made us feel
more confident about the path we took.

When we, who’d gone ahead, were left alone,
a voice that seemed like lightning as it splits
the air encountered us, a voice that said:

“Whoever captures me will slaughter me”;
and then it fled like thunder when it fades
after the cloud is suddenly ripped through.

As soon as that first voice had granted us
a truce, another voice cried out with such
uproar—like thunder quick to follow thunder:

“I am Aglauros, who was turned to stone”;
and then, to draw more near the poet, I
moved to my right instead of moving forward.

By now the air on every side was quiet;
and he told me: “That is the sturdy bit
that should hold every man within his limits.

But you would take the bait, so that the hook
of the old adversary draws you to him;
thus, neither spur nor curb can serve to save you.

Heaven would call—and it encircles—you;
it lets you see its never—ending beauties;
and yet your eyes would only see the ground;

thus, He who sees all things would strike you down.”