Remember, reader, if you’ve ever been
caught in the mountains by a mist through which
you only saw as moles see through their skin,

how, when the thick, damp vapors once begin
to thin, the sun’s sphere passes feebly through them,
then your imagination will be quick

to reach the point where it can see how I
first came to see the sun again—when it
was almost at the point at which it sets.

So, my steps matched my master’s trusty steps;
out of that cloud I came, reaching the rays
that, on the shores below, by now were spent.

O fantasy, you that at times would snatch
us so from outward things—we notice nothing
although a thousand trumpets sound around us—

who moves you when the senses do not spur you?
A light that finds its form in Heaven moves you—
directly or led downward by God’s will.

Within my fantasy I saw impressed
the savagery of one who then, transformed,
became the bird that most delights in song;

at this, my mind withdrew to the within,
to what imagining might bring; no thing
that came from the without could enter in.

Then into my deep fantasy there rained
one who was crucified; and as he died,
he showed his savagery and his disdain.

Around him were great Ahasuerus and
Esther his wife, and the just Mordecai,
whose saying and whose doing were so upright.

And when this image shattered of itself,
just like a bubble that has lost the water
beneath which it was formed, there then rose up

in my envisioning a girl who wept
most bitterly and said: “O queen, why did
you, in your wrath, desire to be no more?

So as to keep Lavinia, you killed
yourself; now you have lost me! I am she,
mother, who mourns your fall before another’s.”

Even as sleep is shattered when new light
strikes suddenly against closed eyes and, once
it’s shattered, gleams before it dies completely,

so my imagination fell away
as soon as light—more powerful than light
we are accustomed to—beat on my eyes.

I looked about to see where I might be;
but when a voice said: “Here one can ascend,”
then I abandoned every other intent.

That voice made my will keen to see the one
who’d spoken—with the eagerness that cannot
be still until it faces what it wants.

But even as the sun, become too strong,
defeats our vision, veiling its own form,
so there my power of sight was overcome.

“This spirit is divine; and though unasked,
he would conduct us to the upward path;
he hides himself with that same light he sheds.

He does with us as men do with themselves;
for he who sees a need but waits to be
asked is already set on cruel refusal.

Now let our steps accept his invitation,
and let us try to climb before dark falls—
then, until day returns, we’ll have to halt.”

So said my guide; and toward a stairway, he
and I, together, turned; and just as soon
as I was at the first step, I sensed something

much like the motion of a wing, and wind
that beat against my face, and words: “Beati
pacifici, those free of evil anger!”

Above us now the final rays before;
the fall of night were raised to such a height
that we could see the stars on every side.

“O why, my strength, do you so melt away?”
I said within myself, because I felt
the force within my legs compelled to halt.

We’d reached a point at which the upward stairs
no longer climbed, and we were halted there
just like a ship when it has touched the shore.

I listened for a while, hoping to hear
whatever there might be in this new circle;
then I turned toward my master, asking him:

“Tell me, my gentle father: what offense
is purged within the circle we have reached?
Although our feet must stop, your words need not.”

And he to me: “Precisely here, the love
of good that is too tepidly pursued
is mended; here the lazy oar plies harder.

But so that you may understand more clearly,
now turn your mind to me, and you will gather
some useful fruit from our delaying here.

My son, there’s no Creator and no creature
who ever was without love—natural
or mental; and you know that,” he began.

“The natural is always without error,
but mental love may choose an evil object
or err through too much or too little vigor.

As long as it’s directed toward the First Good
and tends toward secondary goods with measure,
it cannot be the cause of evil pleasure;

but when it twists toward evil, or attends
to good with more or less care than it should,
those whom He made have worked against their Maker.

From this you see that—of necessity—
love is the seed in you of every virtue
and of all acts deserving punishment.

Now, since love never turns aside its eyes
from the well—being of its subject, things
are surely free from hatred of themselves;

and since no being can be seen as self—
existing and divorced from the First Being,
each creature is cut off from hating Him.

Thus, if I have distinguished properly,
ill love must mean to wish one’s neighbor ill;
and this love’s born in three ways in your clay.

There’s he who, through abasement of another,
hopes for supremacy; he only longs
to see his neighbor’s excellence cast down.

Then there is one who, when he is outdone,
fears his own loss of fame, power, honor, favor;
his sadness loves misfortune for his neighbor.

And there is he who, over injury
received, resentful, for revenge grows greedy
and, angrily, seeks out another’s harm.

This threefold love is expiated here
below; now I would have you understand
the love that seeks the good distortedly.

Each apprehends confusedly a Good
in which the mind may rest, and longs for It;
and, thus, all strive to reach that Good; but if

the love that urges you to know It or
to reach that Good is lax, this terrace, after
a just repentance, punishes for that.

There is a different good, which does not make
men glad; it is not happiness, is not
true essence, fruit and root of every good.

The love that—profligately—yields to that
is wept on in three terraces above us;
but I’ll not say what three shapes that loves takes—

may you seek those distinctions for yourself.”