The subtle teacher had completed his
discourse to me; attentively he watched
my eyes to see if I seemed satisfied.

And I, still goaded by new thirst, was silent
without, although within I said: “Perhaps
I have displeased him with too many questions.”

But that true father, who had recognized
the timid want I would not tell aloud,
by speaking, gave me courage to speak out.

At which I said: “Master, my sight is so
illumined by your light—I recognize
all that your words declare or analyze.

Therefore, I pray you, gentle father dear,
to teach me what love is: you have reduced
to love both each good and its opposite.”

He said: “Direct your intellect’s sharp eyes
toward me, and let the error of the blind
who’d serve as guides be evident to you.

The soul, which is created quick to love,
responds to everything that pleases, just
as soon as beauty wakens it to act.

Your apprehension draws an image from
a real object and expands upon
that object until soul has turned toward it;

and if, so turned, the soul tends steadfastly,
then that propensity is love—it’s nature
that joins the soul in you, anew, through beauty.

Then, just as flames ascend because the form
of fire was fashioned to fly upward, toward
the stuff of its own sphere, where it lasts longest,

so does the soul, when seized, move into longing,
a motion of the spirit, never resting
till the beloved thing has made it joyous.

Now you can plainly see how deeply hidden
truth is from scrutinists who would insist
that every love is, in itself, praiseworthy;

and they are led to error by the matter
of love, because it may seem—always—good;
but not each seal is fine, although the wax is.”

“Your speech and my own wit that followed it,”
I answered him, “have shown me what love is;
but that has filled me with still greater doubt;

for if love’s offered to us from without
and is the only foot with which soul walks,
soul—going straight or crooked—has no merit.”

And he to me: “What reason can see here,
I can impart; past that, for truth of faith,
it’s Beatrice alone you must await.

Every substantial form, at once distinct
from matter and conjoined to it, ingathers
the force that is distinctively its own,

a force unknown to us until it acts—
it’s never shown except in its effects,
just as green boughs display the life in plants.

And thus man does not know the source of his
intelligence of primal notions and
his tending toward desire’s primal objects:

both are in you just as in bees there is
the honey—making urge; such primal will
deserves no praise, and it deserves no blame.

Now, that all other longings may conform
to this first will, there is in you, inborn,
the power that counsels, keeper of the threshold

of your assent: this is the principle
on which your merit may be judged, for it
garners and winnows good and evil longings.

Those reasoners who reached the roots of things
learned of this inborn freedom; the bequest
that, thus, they left unto the world is ethics.

Even if we allow necessity
as source for every love that flames in you,
the power to curb that love is still your own.

This noble power is what Beatrice
means by free will; therefore, remember it,
if she should ever speak of it to you.”

The moon, with midnight now behind us, made
the stars seem scarcer to us; it was shaped
just like a copper basin, gleaming, new;

and countercourse, it crossed those paths the sun
ignites when those in Rome can see it set
between the Corsicans and the Sardinians.

That gracious shade for whom Pietola
won more renown than any Mantuan town,
had freed me from the weight of doubt I bore;

so that I, having harvested his clear
and open answers to my questions, stood
like one who, nearing sleep, has random visions.

But readiness for sleep was suddenly
taken from me by people who, behind
our backs, already turned in our direction.

Just as—of old—Ismenus and Asopus,
at night, along their banks, saw crowds and clamor
whenever Thebans had to summon Bacchus,

such was the arching crowd that curved around
that circle, driven on, as I made out,
by righteous will as well as by just love.

Soon all that mighty throng drew near us, for
they ran and ran; and two, in front of them,
who wept, were crying: “In her journey, Mary

made haste to reach the mountain, and, in order
to conquer Lerida, first Caesar thrust
against Marseilles, and then to Spain he rushed.”

Following them, the others cried: “Quick, quick,
lest time be lost through insufficient love;
where urge for good is keen, grace finds new green.”

“O people in whom eager fervor now
may compensate for sloth and negligence
you showed in doing good half—heartedly,

he—who’s alive, and surely I don’t lie
to you—would climb above as soon as he
has seen the sun shed light on us again;

then, tell us where the passage lies at hand.”
My guide said this. One of the souls replied:
“Come, follow us, and you will find the gap.

We are so fully anxious to advance—
we cannot halt; and do forgive us, should
you take our penance for discourtesy.

I was St. Zeno’s abbot in Verona
under the rule of valiant Barbarossa,
of whom Milan still speaks with so much sorrow.

And there is one with one foot in the grave,
who soon will weep over that monastery,
lamenting that he once had power there,

because, in place of its true shepherd, he
put one who was unsound of body and,
still more, of mind, and born in sin—his son.

I don’t know if he said more or was silent—
he had already raced so far beyond us;
but I heard this much and was pleased to hear it.

And he who was my help in every need
said: “Turn around: see those two coming—they
whose words mock sloth.” And I heard those two say

behind all of the rest: “The ones for whom
the sea parted were dead before the Jordan
saw those who had inherited its lands;

and those who did not suffer trials until
the end together with Anchises’ son
gave themselves up to life without renown.”

Then, when those shades were so far off from us
that seeing them became impossible,
a new thought rose inside of me and, from

that thought, still others—many and diverse—
were born: I was so drawn from random thought
to thought that, wandering in mind, I shut

my eyes, transforming thought on thought to dream.