Against a better will, the will fights weakly;
therefore, to please him, though against my pleasure,
I drew my unquenched sponge out of the water.

I moved on, and my guide moved through the un—
encumbered space, hugging the rock, as one
walks on a wall, close to the battlements;

for those whose eyes would melt down, drop by drop,
the evil that possesses all the world,
were too close to the edge, on the far side.

May you be damned, o ancient wolf, whose power
can claim more prey than all the other beasts—
your hungering is deep and never—ending!

O heavens, through whose revolutions many
think things on earth are changed, when will he come—
the one whose works will drive that wolf away?

Our steps were short and slow as we moved on;
I was attentive to the shades; I heard
the sorrow in their tears and lamentations.

Then I, by chance, heard one ahead of us
crying in his lament, “Sweet Mary,” as
a woman would outcry in labor pains.

And he continued: “In that hostel where
you had set down your holy burden, there
one can discover just how poor you were.”

Following this I heard: “O good Fabricius,
you chose, as your possessions, indigence
with virtue rather than much wealth with vice.”

These words had been so pleasing to me—I
moved forward, so that I might come to know
the spirit from whom they had seemed to come.

He kept on speaking, telling the largesse
of Nicholas—the gifts he gave the maidens
so that they might be honorably wed.

“O soul who speaks of so much righteousness,
do tell me who you were,” I said, “and why
just you alone renew these seemly praises.

Your speaking to me will not go unthanked
when I return to finish the short span
of that life which now hurries toward its end.”

And he: “I’ll tell you—not because I hope
for solace from your world, but for such grace
as shines in you before your death’s arrived.

I was the root of the obnoxious plant
that overshadows all the Christian lands,
so that fine fruit can rarely rise from them.

But if Douai and Lille and Bruges and Ghent
had power, they would soon take vengeance on it;
and this I beg of Him who judges all.

The name I bore beyond was Hugh Capet:
of me were born the Louises and Philips
by whom France has been ruled most recently.

I was the son of a Parisian butcher.
When all the line of ancient kings was done
and only one—a monk in gray—survived,

I found the reins that ruled the kingdom tight
within my hands, and I held so much new—
gained power and possessed so many friends

that, to the widowed crown, my own son’s head
was elevated, and from him began
the consecrated bones of all those kings.

Until the giant dowry of Provence
removed all sense of shame within my house,
my line was not worth much, but did no wrong.

There its rapine began with lies and force;
and then it seized—that it might make amends—
Ponthieu and Normandy and Gascony.

Charles came to Italy and, for amends,
made Conradin a victim, and then thrust
back Thomas into Heaven, for amends.

I see a time—not too far off—in which
another Charles advances out of France
to make himself and his descendants famous.

He does not carry weapons when he comes,
only the lance that Judas tilted; this
he couches so—he twists the paunch of Florence.

From this he’ll gain not land, just shame and sin,
which will be all the heavier for him
as he would reckon lightly such disgrace.

The other, who once left his ship as prisoner—
I see him sell his daughter, bargaining
as pirates haggle over female slaves.

O avarice, my house is now your captive:
it traffics in the flesh of its own children—
what more is left for you to do to us?

That past and future evil may seem less,
I see the fleur—de—lis enter Anagni
and, in His vicar, Christ made prisoner.

I see Him mocked a second time; I see
the vinegar and gall renewed—and He
is slain between two thieves who’re still alive.

And I see the new Pilate, one so cruel
that, still not sated, he, without decree,
carries his greedy sails into the Temple.

O You, my Lord, when will You let me be
happy on seeing vengeance that, concealed,
makes sweet Your anger in Your secrecy?

What I have said about the only bride
the Holy Ghost has known, the words that made
you turn to me for commentary—these

words serve as answer to our prayers as long
as it is day; but when night falls, then we
recite examples that are contrary.

Then we tell over how Pygmalion,
out of his greedy lust for gold, became
a thief and traitor and a parricide;

the wretchedness of avaricious Midas,
resulting from his ravenous request,
the consequence that always makes men laugh;

and each of us recalls the foolish Achan—
how he had robbed the spoils, so that the anger
of Joshua still seems to sting him here.

Then we accuse Sapphira and her husband;
we praise the kicks Heliodorus suffered;
and Polymnestor, who killed Polydorus,

resounds, in infamy, round all this mountain;
and finally, what we cry here is: Crassus,
tell us, because you know: “How does gold taste?”‘

At times one speaks aloud, another low,
according to the sentiment that goads
us now to be more swift and now more slow:

thus, I was not alone in speaking of
the good we cite by day, but here nearby
no other spirit raised his voice as high.”

We had already taken leave of him
and were already struggling to advance
along that road as far as we were able,

when I could feel the mountain tremble like
a falling thing; at which a chill seized me
as cold grips one who goes to meet his death.

Delos had surely not been buffeted
so hard before Latona planted there
the nest in which to bear the sky’s two eyes.

Then such a shout rose up on every side
that, drawing near to me, my master said:
“Don’t be afraid, as long as I’m your guide.”

“Gloria in excelsis Deo,” they all cried—
so did I understand from those nearby,
whose shouted words were able to be heard.

Just like the shepherds who first heard that song,
we stood, but did not move, in expectation,
until the trembling stopped, the song was done.

Then we took up again our holy path,
watching the shades who lay along the ground,
who had resumed their customary tears.

My ignorance has never struggled so,
has never made me long so much to know—
if memory does not mislead me now—

as it seemed then to long within my thoughts;
nor did I dare to ask—we were so rushed;
nor, by myself, could I discern the cause.

So, timid, pensive, I pursued my way.