The natural thirst that never can be quenched
except by water that gives grace—the draught
the simple woman of Samaria sought—

tormented me; haste spurred me on the path
crowded with souls, behind my guide; and I
felt pity, though their pain was justified.

And here—even as Luke records for us
that Christ, new—risen from his burial cave,
appeared to two along his way—a shade

appeared; and he advanced behind our backs
while we were careful not to trample on
the outstretched crowd. We did not notice him

until he had addressed us with: “God give
you, o my brothers, peace!” We turned at once;
then, after offering suitable response,

Virgil began: “And may that just tribunal
which has consigned me to eternal exile
place you in peace within the blessed assembly!”

“What!” he exclaimed, as we moved forward quickly.
“If God’s not deemed you worthy of ascent,
who’s guided you so far along His stairs?”

“If you observe the signs the angel traced
upon this man,” my teacher said, “you’ll see
plainly—he’s meant to reign with all the righteous;

but since she who spins night and day had not
yet spun the spool that Clotho sets upon
the distaff and adjusts for everyone,

his soul, the sister of your soul and mine,
in its ascent, could not—alone—have climbed
here, for it does not see the way we see.

Therefore, I was brought forth from Hell’s broad jaws
to guide him in his going; I shall lead
him just as far as where I teach can reach.

But tell me, if you can, why, just before,
the mountain shook and shouted, all of it—
for so it seemed—down to its sea—bathed shore.”

His question threaded so the needle’s eye
of my desire that just the hope alone
of knowing left my thirst more satisfied.

That other shade began: “The sanctity
of these slopes does not suffer anything
that’s without order or uncustomary.

This place is free from every perturbation:
what heaven from itself and in itself
receives may serve as cause here—no thing else.

Therefore, no rain, no hail, no snow, no dew,
no hoarfrost falls here any higher than
the stairs of entry with their three brief steps;

neither thick clouds nor thin appear, nor flash
of lightning; Thaumas’ daughter, who so often
shifts places in your world, is absent here.

Dry vapor cannot climb up any higher
than to the top of the three steps of which
I spoke—where Peter’s vicar plants his feet.

Below that point, there may be small or ample
tremors; but here above, I know not why,
no wind concealed in earth has ever caused

a tremor; for it only trembles here
when some soul feels it’s cleansed, so that it rises
or stirs to climb on high; and that shout follows.

The will alone is proof of purity
and, fully free, surprises soul into
a change of dwelling place—effectively.

Soul had the will to climb before, but that
will was opposed by longing to do penance
(as once, to sin), instilled by divine justice.

And I, who have lain in this suffering
five hundred years and more, just now have felt
my free will for a better threshold: thus,

you heard the earthquake and the pious spirits
throughout the mountain as they praised the Lord—
and may He send them speedily upward.”

So did he speak to us; and just as joy
is greater when we quench a greater thirst,
the joy he brought cannot be told in words.

And my wise guide: “I now can see the net
impeding you, how one slips through, and why
it quakes here, and what makes you all rejoice.

And now may it please you to tell me who
you were, and in your words may I find why
you’ve lain here for so many centuries.”

“In that age when the worthy Titus, with
help from the Highest King, avenged the wounds
from which the blood that Judas sold had flowed,

I had sufficient fame beyond,” that spirit
replied; “I bore the name that lasts the longest
and honors most—but faith was not yet mine.

So gentle was the spirit of my verse
that Rome drew me, son of Toulouse, to her,
and there my brow deserved a crown of myrtle.

On earth my name is still remembered—Statius:
I sang of Thebes and then of great Achilles;
I fell along the way of that last labor.

The sparks that warmed me, the seeds of my ardor,
were from the holy fire—the same that gave
more than a thousand poets light and flame.

I speak of the Aeneid; when I wrote
verse, it was mother to me, it was nurse;
my work, without it, would not weigh an ounce.

And to have lived on earth when Virgil lived—
for that I would extend by one more year
the time I owe before my exile’s end.”

These words made Virgil turn to me, and as
he turned, his face, through silence, said: “Be still”
(and yet the power of will cannot do all,

for tears and smiles are both so faithful to
the feelings that have prompted them that true
feeling escapes the will that would subdue).

But I smiled like a man whose eyes would signal;
at this, the shade was silent, and he stared
where sentiment is clearest—at my eyes—

and said: “So may your trying labor end
successfully, do tell me why—just now—
your face showed me the flashing of a smile.”

Now I am held by one side and the other:
one keeps me still, the other conjures me
to speak; but when, therefore, I sigh, my master

knows why and tells me: “Do not be afraid
to speak, but speak and answer what he has
asked you to tell him with such earnestness.”

At this, I answered: “Ancient spirit, you
perhaps are wondering at the smile I smiled:
but I would have you feel still more surprise.

He who is guide, who leads my eyes on high,
is that same Virgil from whom you derived
the power to sing of men and of the gods.

Do not suppose my smile had any source
beyond the speech you spoke; be sure—it was
those words you said of him that were the cause.”

Now he had bent to kiss my teacher’s feet,
but Virgil told him: “Brother, there’s no need—
you are a shade, a shade is what you see.”

And, rising, he: “Now you can understand
how much love burns in me for you, when I
forget our insubstantiality,

treating the shades as one treats solid things.”