The hour when climbers cannot pause had come:
the sun had left to Taurus the meridian,
and night had left it to the Scorpion.

Therefore, like one who will not stop but moves
along his path, no matter what he sees,
if he is goaded by necessity,

we made our way into the narrow gap
and, one behind the other, took the stairs
so strait that climbers there must separate.

And as the fledgling stork will lift its wing
because it wants to fly, but dares not try
to leave the nest, and lets its wing drop back,

so I, with my desire to question kindled
then spent, arrived as far as making ready
to speak. But my dear father, though our steps

were hurrying, did not stop talking, for
he said: “The iron of the arrow’s touched
the longbow; let the shaft of speech fly off.”

Then I had confidence enough to open
my mouth and ask him: “How can one grow lean
where there is never need for nourishment?”

“If you recall how Meleager was
consumed,” he said, “just when the firebrand
was spent, this won’t be hard to understand;

and if you think how, though your body’s swift,
your image in the mirror captures it,
then what perplexed will seem to you transparent.

But that your will to know may be appeased,
here’s Statius, and I call on him and ask
that he now be the healer of your doubts.”

“If I explain eternal ways to him,”
Statius replied, “while you are present here,
let my excuse be: I cannot refuse you.”

Then he began: “If, son, your mind receives
and keeps my words, then what I say will serve
as light upon the how that you have asked.

The thirsty veins drink up the perfect blood—
but not all of that blood: a portion’s left,
like leavings that are taken from the table.

Within the heart, that part acquires power
to form all of another’s human limbs,
as blood that flows through veins feeds one’s own limbs.

Digested yet again, that part descends
to what is best not named; from there it drips
into the natural receptacle,

upon another’s blood; the two bloods mix,
one ready to be passive and one active
because a perfect place, the heart, prepared them.

The active, having reached the passive, starts
to work: first it coagulates—and then
quickens-the matter it has made more dense.

Having become a soul (much like a plant,
though with this difference—a plant’s complete,
whereas a fetus still is journeying),

the active virtue labors, so the fetus
may move and feel, like a sea-sponge; and then
it starts to organize the powers it’s seeded.

At this point, son, the power that had come
from the begetter’s heart unfolds and spreads,
that nature may see every limb perfected.

But how the animal becomes a speaking
being, you’ve not yet seen; this point’s so hard,
it led one wiser than you are to err

in separating from the possible
intellect the soul, since he could see
no organ for the mind—so did he teach.

Open your heart to truth we now have reached
and know that, once the brain’s articulation
within the fetus has attained perfection,

then the First Mover turns toward it with joy
on seeing so much art in nature and
breathes into it new spirit—vigorous—

which draws all that is active in the fetus
into its substance and becomes one soul
that lives and feels and has self-consciousness.

That what I say may leave you less perplexed,
consider the sun’s heat that, when combined
with sap that flows from vines, is then made wine.

And when Lachesis lacks more thread, then soul’s
divided from the flesh; potentially,
it bears with it the human and divine;

but with the human powers mute, the rest—
intelligence and memory and will—
are more acute in action than they were.

With no delay, the soul falls of itself—
astonishingly—on one of two shores;
there it learns—early—what way it will journey.

There, once the soul is circumscribed by space,
the power that gives form irradiates
as-and as much as—once it formed live limbs.

And even as the saturated air,
since it reflects the rays the sun has sent,
takes rainbow colors as its ornament,

so there, where the soul stopped, the nearby air
takes on the form that soul impressed on it,
a shape that is, potentially, real body;

and then, just as a flame will follow after
the fire whenever fire moves, so that
new form becomes the spirit’s follower.

Since from that airy body it takes on
its semblance, that soul is called ‘shade’: that shape
forms organs for each sense, even for sight.

This airy body lets us speak and laugh;
with it we form the tears and sigh the sighs
that you, perhaps, have heard around this mountain.

Just as we are held fast by longings and
by other sentiments, our shade takes form:
this is the cause of your astonishment.”

By now we’d reached the final turning we
would meet and took the pathway right, at which
we were preoccupied with other cares.

There, from the wall, the mountain hurls its flames;
but, from the terrace side, there whirls a wind
that pushes back the fire and limits it;

thus, on the open side, proceeding one
by one, we went; I feared the fire on
the left and, on the right, the precipice.

My guide said: “On this terrace, it is best
to curb your eyes: the least distraction—left
or right—can mean a step you will regret.”

Then, from the heart of that great conflagration,
I heard “Summae Deus clementiae”
sung—and was not less keen to turn my eyes;

and I saw spirits walking in the flames,
so that I looked at them and at my steps,
sharing the time I had to look at each.

After they’d reached that hymn’s end, “Virum non
cognosco” were the words they cried aloud;
then they began the hymn in a low voice

again, and, done again, they cried: “Diana
kept to the woods and banished Helice
after she’d felt the force of Venus’ poison.”

Then they returned to singing; and they praised
aloud those wives and husbands who were chaste,
as virtue and as matrimony mandate.

This is—I think—the way these spirits act
as long as they are burned by fire: this is
the care and this the nourishment with which

one has to heal the final wound of all.