When the first heaven’s Seven—Stars had halted
(those stars that never rise or set, that are
not veiled except when sin beclouds our vision;

those stars that, there, made everyone aware
of what his duty was, just as the Bear
below brings helmsmen home to harbor), then

the truthful band that had come first between
the griffin and the Seven—Stars turned toward
that chariot as toward their peace, and one

of them, as if sent down from Heaven, hymned
aloud, ” Veni, sponsa, de Libano,”
three times, and all the others echoed him.

Just as the blessed, at the Final Summons,
will rise up—ready—each out of his grave,
singing, with new—clothed voices, Alleluia,

so, from the godly chariot, eternal
life’s messengers and ministers arose:
one hundred stood ad vocem tanti senis.

All of them cried: “Benedictus qui venis,”
and, scattering flowers upward and around,
“Manibus, oh, date lilia plenis.”

I have at times seen all the eastern sky
becoming rose as day began and seen,
adorned in lovely blue, the rest of heaven;

and seen the sun’s face rise so veiled that it
was tempered by the mist and could permit
the eye to look at length upon it; so,

within a cloud of flowers that were cast
by the angelic hands and then rose up
and then fell back, outside and in the chariot,

a woman showed herself to me; above
a white veil, she was crowned with olive boughs;
her cape was green; her dress beneath, flame—red.

Within her presence, I had once been used
to feeling—trembling—wonder, dissolution;
but that was long ago. Still, though my soul,

now she was veiled, could not see her directly,
by way of hidden force that she could move,
I felt the mighty power of old love.

As soon as that deep force had struck my vision
(the power that, when I had not yet left
my boyhood, had already transfixed me),

I turned around and to my left—just as
a little child, afraid or in distress,
will hurry to his mother—anxiously,

to say to Virgil: “I am left with less
than one drop of my blood that does not tremble:
I recognize the signs of the old flame.”

But Virgil had deprived us of himself,
Virgil, the gentlest father, Virgil, he
to whom I gave my self for my salvation;

and even all our ancient mother lost
was not enough to keep my cheeks, though washed
with dew, from darkening again with tears.

“Dante, though Virgil’s leaving you, do not
yet weep, do not weep yet; you’ll need your tears
for what another sword must yet inflict.”

Just like an admiral who goes to stern
and prow to see the officers who guide
the other ships, encouraging their tasks;

so, on the left side of the chariot
(I’d turned around when I had heard my name—
which, of necessity, I transcribe here),

I saw the lady who had first appeared
to me beneath the veils of the angelic
flowers look at me across the stream.

Although the veil she wore—down from her head,
which was encircled by Minerva’s leaves—
did not allow her to be seen distinctly,

her stance still regal and disdainful, she
continued, just as one who speaks but keeps
until the end the fiercest parts of speech:

“Look here! For I am Beatrice, I am!
How were you able to ascend the mountain?
Did you not know that man is happy here?”

My lowered eyes caught sight of the clear stream,
but when I saw myself reflected there,
such shame weighed on my brow, my eyes drew back

and toward the grass; just as a mother seems
harsh to her child, so did she seem to me—
how bitter is the savor of stern pity!

Her words were done. The angels—suddenly—
sang, “In te, Domine, speravi”; but
their singing did not go past “pedes meos.”

Even as snow among the sap—filled trees
along the spine of Italy will freeze
when gripped by gusts of the Slavonian winds,

then, as it melts, will trickle through itself—
that is, if winds breathe north from shade—less lands—
just as, beneath the flame, the candle melts;

so I, before I’d heard the song of those
whose notes always accompany the notes
of the eternal spheres, was without tears

and sighs; but when I heard the sympathy
for me within their gentle harmonies,
as if they’d said: “Lady, why shame him so?”—

then did the ice that had restrained my heart
become water and breath; and from my breast
and through my lips and eyes they issued—anguished.

Still standing motionless upon the left
side of the chariot, she then addressed
the angels who had been compassionate:

“You are awake in never—ending day,
and neither night nor sleep can steal from you
one step the world would take along its way;

therefore, I’m more concerned that my reply
be understood by him who weeps beyond,
so that his sorrow’s measure match his sin.

Not only through the work of the great spheres—
which guide each seed to a determined end,
depending on what stars are its companions—

but through the bounty of the godly graces,
which shower down from clouds so high that we
cannot approach them with our vision, he,

when young, was such—potentially—that any
propensity innate in him would have
prodigiously succeeded, had he acted.

But where the soil has finer vigor, there
precisely—when untilled or badly seeded—
will that terrain grow wilder and more noxious.

My countenance sustained him for a while;
showing my youthful eyes to him, I led
him with me toward the way of righteousness.

As soon as I, upon the threshold of
my second age, had changed my life, he took
himself away from me and followed after

another; when, from flesh to spirit, I
had risen, and my goodness and my beauty
had grown, I was less dear to him, less welcome:

he turned his footsteps toward an untrue path;
he followed counterfeits of goodness, which
will never pay in full what they have promised.

Nor did the inspirations I received—
with which, in dream and otherwise, I called
him back—help me; he paid so little heed!

He fell so far there were no other means
to lead him to salvation, except this:
to let him see the people who were lost.

For this I visited the gateway of
the dead; to him who guided him above
my prayers were offered even as I wept.

The deep design of God would have been broken
if Lethe had been crossed and he had drunk
such waters but had not discharged the debt

of penitence that’s paid when tears are shed.”