My eyes were so insistent, so intent
on finding satisfaction for their ten—
year thirst that every other sense was spent.

And to each side, my eyes were walled in by
indifference to all else (with its old net,
the holy smile so drew them to itself),

when I was forced to turn my eyes leftward
by those three goddesses because I heard
them warning me: “You stare too fixedly.”

And the condition that afflicts the sight
when eyes have just been struck by the sun’s force
left me without my vision for a time.

But when my sight became accustomed to
lesser sensations (that is, lesser than
the mighty force that made my eyes retreat),

I saw the glorious army: it had wheeled
around and to the right; it had turned east;
it faced the seven flames and faced the sun.

Just as, protected by its shields, a squadron
will wheel, to save itself, around its standard
until all of its men have changed direction;

so here all troops of the celestial kingdom
within the vanguard passed in front of us
before the chariot swung around the pole—shaft.

Back to the wheels the ladies then returned;
and though the griffin moved the blessed burden,
when he did that, none of his feathers stirred.

The lovely lady who’d helped me ford Lethe,
and I and Statius, following the wheel
that turned right, round the inner, smaller arc,

were slowly passing through the tall woods—empty
because of one who had believed the serpent;
our pace was measured by angelic song.

The space we covered could be matched perhaps
by three flights of an unleashed arrow’s shafts,
when Beatrice descended from the chariot.

“Adam,” I heard all of them murmuring,
and then they drew around a tree whose every
branch had been stripped of flowers and of leaves.

As it grows higher, so its branches spread
wider; it reached a height that even in
their forests would amaze the Indians.

“Blessed are you, whose beak does not, o griffin,
pluck the sweet—tasting fruit that is forbidden
and then afflicts the belly that has eaten!”

So, round the robust tree, the others shouted;
and the two-natured animal: “Thus is
the seed of every righteous man preserved.”

And turning to the pole—shaft he had pulled,
he drew it to the foot of the stripped tree
and, with a branch of that tree, tied the two.

Just like our plants that, when the great light falls
on earth, mixed with the light that shines behind
the stars of the celestial Fishes, swell

with buds—each plant renews its coloring
before the sun has yoked its steeds beneath
another constellation: so the tree,

whose boughs—before—had been so solitary,
was now renewed, showing a tint that was
less than the rose, more than the violet.

I did not understand the hymn that they
then sang—it is not sung here on this earth—
nor, drowsy, did I listen to the end.

Could I describe just how the ruthless eyes
(eyes whose long wakefulness cost them so dear),
hearing the tale of Syrinx, fell asleep,

then like a painter painting from a model,
I’d draw the way in which I fell asleep;
but I refrain—let one more skillful paint.

I move, therefore, straight to my waking time;
I say that radiance rent the veil of sleep,
as did a voice: “Rise up: what are you doing?”

Even as Peter, John, and James, when brought
to see the blossoms of the apple tree—
whose fruit abets the angels’ hungering,

providing endless wedding-feasts in Heaven—
were overwhelmed by what they saw, but then,
hearing the word that shattered deeper sleeps,

arose and saw their fellowship was smaller—
since Moses and Elijah now had left—
and saw a difference in their Teacher’s dress;

so I awoke and saw, standing above me,
she who before—compassionate—had guided
my steps along the riverbank. Completely

bewildered, I asked: “Where is Beatrice?”
And she: “Beneath the boughs that were renewed,
she’s seated on the root of that tree; see

the company surrounding her; the rest
have left; behind the griffin they have climbed
on high with song that is more sweet, more deep.”

I do not know if she said more than that,
because, by now, I had in sight one who
excluded all things other from my view.

She sat alone upon the simple ground,
left there as guardian of the chariot
I’d seen the two—form animal tie fast.

The seven nymphs encircled her as garland,
and in their hands they held the lamps that can
not be extinguished by the north or south winds.

“Here you shall be—awhile—a visitor;
but you shall be with me—and without end—
Rome’s citizen, the Rome in which Christ is

Roman; and thus, to profit that world which
lives badly, watch the chariot steadfastly
and, when you have returned beyond, transcribe

what you have seen.” Thus, Beatrice; and I,
devoutly, at the feet of her commandments,
set mind and eyes where she had wished me to.

Never has lightning fallen with such swift
motion from a thick cloud, when it descends
from the most distant limit in the heavens,

as did the bird of Jove that I saw swoop
down through the tree, tearing the bark as well
as the new leaves and the new flowering.

It struck the chariot with all its force;
the chariot twisted, like a ship that’s crossed
by seas that now storm starboard and now port.

I then saw, as it leaped into the body
of that triumphal chariot, a fox
that seemed to lack all honest nourishment:

but, as she railed against its squalid sins,
my lady forced that fox to flight as quick
as, stripped of flesh, its bones permitted it.

Then I could see the eagle plunge—again
down through the tree—into the chariot
and leave it feathered with its plumage; and,

just like a voice from an embittered heart,
a voice issued from Heaven, saying this:
“O my small bark, your freight is wickedness!”

Then did the ground between the two wheels seem
to me to open; from the earth, a dragon
emerged; it drove its tail up through the chariot;

and like a wasp when it retracts its sting,
drawing its venomed tail back to itself,
it dragged part of the bottom off, and went

its way, undulating. And what was left
was covered with the eagle’s plumes—perhaps
offered with sound and kind intent—much as

grass covers fertile ground; and the pole—shaft
and both wheels were re—covered in less time
than mouth must be kept open when one sighs.

Transfigured so, the saintly instrument
grew heads, which sprouted from its parts; three grew
upon the pole—shaft, and one at each corner.

The three were horned like oxen, but the four
had just a single horn upon their foreheads:
such monsters never have been seen before.

Just like a fortress set on a steep slope,
securely seated there, ungirt, a whore,
whose eyes were quick to rove, appeared to me;

and I saw at her side, erect, a giant,
who seemed to serve as her custodian;
and they—again, again—embraced each other.

But when she turned her wandering, wanton eyes
to me, then that ferocious amador
beat her from head to foot; then, swollen with

suspicion, fierce with anger, he untied
the chariot—made—monster, dragging it
into the wood, so that I could not see

either the whore or the strange chariot-beast.