The glory of the One who moves all things
permeates the universe and glows
in one part more and in another less.

I was within the heaven that receives
more of His light; and I saw things that he
who from that height descends, forgets or can

not speak; for nearing its desired end,
our intellect sinks into an abyss
so deep that memory fails to follow it.

Nevertheless, as much as I, within
my mind, could treasure of the holy kingdom
shall now become the matter of my song.

O good Apollo, for this final task
make me the vessel of your excellence,
what you, to merit your loved laurel, ask.

Until this point, one of Parnassus’ peaks
sufficed for me; but now I face the test
the agon that is left; I need both crests.

Enter into my breast; within me breathe
the very power you made manifest
when you drew Marsyas out from his limbs’ sheath.

O godly force, if you so lend yourself
to me, that I might show the shadow of
the blessed realm inscribed within my mind,

then you would see me underneath the tree
you love; there I shall take as crown the leaves
of which my theme and you shall make me worthy.

So seldom, father, are those garlands gathered
for triumph of a ruler or a poet—
a sign of fault or shame in human wills—

that when Peneian branches can incite
someone to long and thirst for them, delight
must fill the happy Delphic deity.

Great fire can follow a small spark: there may
be better voices after me to pray
to Cyrrha’s god for aid—that he may answer.

The lantern of the world approaches mortals
by varied paths; but on that way which links
four circles with three crosses, it emerges

joined to a better constellation and
along a better course, and it can temper
and stamp the world’s wax more in its own manner.

Its entry from that point of the horizon
brought morning there and evening here; almost
all of that hemisphere was white—while ours

was dark—when I saw Beatrice turn round
and left, that she might see the sun; no eagle
has ever stared so steadily at it.

And as a second ray will issue from the
first and reascend, much like a pilgrim
who seeks his home again, so on her action,

fed by my eyes to my imagination,
my action drew, and on the sun I set
my sight more than we usually do.

More is permitted to our powers there
than is permitted here, by virtue of
that place, made for mankind as its true home.

I did not bear it long, but not so briefly
as not to see it sparkling round about,
like molten iron emerging from the fire;

and suddenly it seemed that day had been
added to day, as if the One who can
had graced the heavens with a second sun.

The eyes of Beatrice were all intent
on the eternal circles; from the sun,
I turned aside; I set my eyes on her.

In watching her, within me I was changed
as Glaucus changed, tasting the herb that made
him a companion of the other sea gods.

Passing beyond the human cannot be
worded; let Glaucus serve as simile—
until grace grant you the experience.

Whether I only was the part of me
that You created last, You—governing
the heavens—know: it was Your light that raised me.

When that wheel which You make eternal through
the heavens’ longing for You drew me with
the harmony You temper and distinguish,

the fire of the sun then seemed to me
to kindle so much of the sky, that rain
or river never formed so broad a lake.

The newness of the sound and the great light
incited me to learn their cause—I was
more keen than I had ever been before.

And she who read me as I read myself,
to quiet the commotion in my mind,
opened her lips before I opened mine

to ask, and she began: “You make yourself
obtuse with false imagining; you can
not see what you would see if you dispelled it.

You are not on the earth as you believe;
but lightning, flying from its own abode,
is less swift than you are, returning home.”

While I was freed from my first doubt by these
brief words she smiled to me, I was yet caught
in new perplexity. I said: “I was

content already; after such great wonder,
I rested. But again I wonder how
my body rises past these lighter bodies.”

At which, after a sigh of pity, she
settled her eyes on me with the same look
a mother casts upon a raving child,

and she began: “All things, among themselves,
possess an order; and this order is
the form that makes the universe like God.

Here do the higher beings see the imprint
of the Eternal Worth, which is the end
to which the pattern I have mentioned tends.

Within that order, every nature has
its bent, according to a different station,
nearer or less near to its origin.

Therefore, these natures move to different ports
across the mighty sea of being, each
given the impulse that will bear it on.

This impulse carries fire to the moon;
this is the motive force in mortal creatures;
this binds the earth together, makes it one.

Not only does the shaft shot from this bow
strike creatures lacking intellect, but those
who have intelligence, and who can love.

The Providence that has arrayed all this
forever quiets—with Its light—that heaven
in which the swiftest of the spheres revolves;

to there, as toward a destined place, we now
are carried by the power of the bow
that always aims its shaft at a glad mark.

Yet it is true that, even as a shape
may, often, not accord with art’s intent,
since matter may be unresponsive, deaf,

so, from this course, the creature strays at times
because he has the power, once impelled,
to swerve elsewhere; as lightning from a cloud

is seen to fall, so does the first impulse,
when man has been diverted by false pleasure,
turn him toward earth. You should—if I am right—

not feel more marvel at your climbing than
you would were you considering a stream
that from a mountain’s height falls to its base.

It would be cause for wonder in you if,
no longer hindered, you remained below,
as if, on earth, a living flame stood still.”

Then she again turned her gaze heavenward.