O you who are within your little bark,
eager to listen, following behind
my ship that, singing, crosses to deep seas,

turn back to see your shores again: do not
attempt to sail the seas I sail; you may,
by losing sight of me, be left astray.

The waves I take were never sailed before;
Minerva breathes, Apollo pilots me,
and the nine Muses show to me the Bears.

You other few who turned your minds in time
unto the bread of angels, which provides
men here with life—but hungering for more—

you may indeed commit your vessel to
the deep salt—sea, keeping your course within
my wake, ahead of where waves smooth again.

Those men of glory, those who crossed to Colchis,
when they saw Jason turn into a ploughman
were less amazed than you will be amazed.

The thirst that is innate and everlasting—
thirst for the godly realm—bore us away
as swiftly as the heavens that you see.

Beatrice gazed upward. I watched her.
But in a span perhaps no longer than
an arrow takes to strike, to fly, to leave

the bow, I reached a place where I could see
that something wonderful drew me; and she
from whom my need could not be hidden, turned

to me (her gladness matched her loveliness):
“Direct your mind to God in gratefulness,”
she said; “He has brought us to the first star.”

It seemed to me that we were covered by
a brilliant, solid, dense, and stainless cloud,
much like a diamond that the sun has struck.

Into itself, the everlasting pearl
received us, just as water will accept
a ray of light and yet remain intact.

If I was body (and on earth we can
not see how things material can share
one space—the case, when body enters body),

then should our longing be still more inflamed
to see that Essence in which we discern
how God and human nature were made one.

What we hold here by faith, shall there be seen,
not demonstrated but directly known,
even as the first truth that man believes.

I answered: “With the most devotion I
can summon, I thank Him who has brought me
far from the mortal world. But now tell me:

what are the dark marks on this planet’s body
that there below, on earth, have made men tell
the tale of Cain?” She smiled somewhat, and then

she said: “If the opinion mortals hold
falls into error when the senses’ key
cannot unlock the truth, you should not be

struck by the arrows of amazement once
you recognize that reason, even when
supported by the senses, has short wings.

But tell me what you think of it yourself.”
And I: “What seems to us diverse up here
is caused—I think—by matter dense and rare.”

And she: “You certainly will see that your
belief is deeply sunk in error if
you listen carefully as I rebut it.

The eighth sphere offers many lights to you,
and you can tell that they, in quality
and size, are stars with different visages.

If rarity and density alone
caused this, then all the stars would share one power
distributed in lesser, greater, or

in equal force. But different powers must
be fruits of different formal principles;
were you correct, one only would be left,

the rest, destroyed. And more, were rarity
the cause of the dim spots you question, then
in part this planet would lack matter through

and through, or else as, in a body, lean
and fat can alternate, so would this planet
alternate the pages in its volume.

To validate the first case, in the sun’s
eclipse, the light would have to show through, just
as when it crosses matter that is slender.

This is not so; therefore we must consider
the latter case—if I annul that too,
then your opinion surely is confuted.

If rarity does not run through and through
the moon, then there must be a limit where
thickness does not allow the light to pass;

from there, the rays of sun would be thrown back,
just as, from glass that hides lead at its back,
a ray of colored light returns, reflected.

Now you will say that where a ray has been
reflected from a section farther back,
that ray will show itself to be more dim.

Yet an experiment, were you to try it,
could free you from your cavil—and the source
of your arts’ course springs from experiment.

Taking three mirrors, place a pair of them
at equal distance from you; set the third
midway between those two, but farther back.

Then, turning toward them, at your back have placed
a light that kindles those three mirrors and
returns to you, reflected by them all.

Although the image in the farthest glass
will be of lesser size, there you will see
that it must match the brightness of the rest.

Now, just as the sub—matter of the snow,
beneath the blows of the warm rays, is stripped
of both its former color and its cold,

so is your mind left bare of error; I
would offer now to you a new form, light
so living that it trembles in your sight.

Within the heaven of the godly peace
revolves a body in whose power lies
the being of all things that it enfolds.

The sphere that follows, where so much is shown,
to varied essences bestows that being,
to stars distinct and yet contained in it.

The other spheres, in ways diverse, direct
the diverse powers they possess, so that
these forces can bear fruit, attain their aims.

So do these organs of the universe
proceed, as you now see, from stage to stage,
receiving from above and acting downward.

Now do attend to how I pass by way
of reason to the truth you want that—then—
you may learn how to cross the ford alone.

The force and motion of the holy spheres
must be inspired by the blessed movers,
just as the smith imparts the hammer’s art;

and so, from the deep Mind that makes it wheel,
the sphere that many lights adorn receives
that stamp of which it then becomes the seal.

And as the soul within your dust is shared
by different organs, each most suited to
a different potency, so does that Mind

unfold and multiply its bounty through
the varied heavens, though that Intellect
itself revolves upon its unity.

With the dear body that it quickens and
with which, as life in you, it too is bound,
each different power forms a different compound.

Because of the glad nature of its source,
the power mingled with a sphere shines forth,
as gladness, through the living pupil, shines.

From this, and not from matter rare or dense,
derive the differences from light to light;
this is the forming principle, producing,

conforming with its worth, the dark, the bright.”