O senseless cares of mortals, how deceiving
are syllogistic reasonings that bring
your wings to flight so low, to earthly things!

One studied law and one the Aphorisms
of the physicians; one was set on priesthood
and one, through force or fraud, on rulership;

one meant to plunder, one to politick;
one labored, tangled in delights of flesh,
and one was fully bent on indolence;

while I, delivered from our servitude
to all these things, was in the height of heaven
with Beatrice, so gloriously welcomed.

After each of those spirits had returned
to that place in the ring where it had been,
it halted, like a candle in its stand.

And from within the splendor that had spoken
to me before, I heard him, as he smiled—
become more radiant, more pure—begin:

“Even as I grow bright within Its rays,
so, as I gaze at the Eternal Light,
I can perceive your thoughts and see their cause.

You are in doubt; you want an explanation
in language that is open and expanded,
so clear that it contents your understanding

of two points: where I said, ‘They fatten well,’
and where I said, ‘No other ever rose’—
and here one has to make a clear distinction.

The Providence that rules the world with wisdom
so fathomless that creatures’ intellects
are vanquished and can never probe its depth,

so that the Bride of Him who, with loud cries,
had wed her with His blessed blood, might meet
her Love with more fidelity and more

assurance in herself, on her behalf
commanded that there be two princes, one
on this side, one on that side, as her guides.

One prince was all seraphic in his ardor;
the other, for his wisdom, had possessed
the splendor of cherubic light on earth.

I shall devote my tale to one, because
in praising either prince one praises both:
the labors of the two were toward one goal.

Between Topino’s stream and that which flows
down from the hill the blessed Ubaldo chose,
from a high peak there hangs a fertile slope;

from there Perugia feels both heat and cold
at Porta Sole, while behind it sorrow
Nocera and Gualdo under their hard yoke.

From this hillside, where it abates its rise,
a sun was born into the world, much like
this sun when it is climbing from the Ganges.

Therefore let him who names this site not say
Ascesi, which would be to say too little,
but Orient, if he would name it rightly.

That sun was not yet very distant from
his rising, when he caused the earth to take
some comfort from his mighty influence;

for even as a youth, he ran to war
against his father, on behalf of her—
the lady unto whom, just as to death,

none willingly unlocks the door; before
his spiritual court et coram patre,
he wed her; day by day he loved her more.

She was bereft of her first husband; scorned,
obscure, for some eleven hundred years,
until that sun came, she had had no suitor.

Nor did it help her when men heard that he
who made earth tremble found her unafraid—
serene, with Amyclas—when he addressed her;

nor did her constancy and courage help
when she, even when Mary stayed below,
suffered with Christ upon the cross. But so

that I not tell my tale too darkly, you
may now take Francis and take Poverty
to be the lovers meant in my recounting.

Their harmony and their glad looks, their love
and wonder and their gentle contemplation,
served others as a source of holy thoughts;

so much so, that the venerable Bernard
went barefoot first; he hurried toward such peace;
and though he ran, he thought his pace too slow.

O wealth unknown! O good that is so fruitful!
Egidius goes barefoot, and Sylvester,
behind the groom—the bride delights them so.

Then Francis—father, master—goes his way
with both his lady and his family,
the lowly cord already round their waists.

Nor did he lower his eyes in shame because
he was the son of Pietro Bernardone,
nor for the scorn and wonder he aroused;

but like a sovereign, he disclosed in full—
to Innocent—the sternness of his rule;
from him he had the first seal of his order.

And after many of the poor had followed
Francis, whose wondrous life were better sung
by glory’s choir in the Empyrean,

the sacred purpose of this chief of shepherds
was then encircled with a second crown
by the Eternal Spirit through Honorius.

And after, in his thirst for martyrdom,
within the presence of the haughty Sultan,
he preached of Christ and those who followed Him.

But, finding hearers who were too unripe
to be converted, he—not wasting time—
returned to harvest the Italian fields;

there, on the naked crag between the Arno
and Tiber, he received the final seal
from Christ; and this, his limbs bore for two years.

When He who destined Francis to such goodness
was pleased to draw him up to the reward
that he had won through his humility,

then to his brothers, as to rightful heirs,
Francis commended his most precious lady,
and he bade them to love her faithfully;

and when, returning to its kingdom, his
bright soul wanted to set forth from her bosom,
it, for its body, asked no other bier.

Consider now that man who was a colleague
worthy of Francis; with him, in high seas,
he kept the bark of Peter on true course.

Such was our patriarch; thus you can see
that those who follow him as he commands,
as cargo carry worthy merchandise.

But now his flock is grown so greedy for
new nourishment that it must wander far,
in search of strange and distant grazing lands;

and as his sheep, remote and vagabond,
stray farther from his side, at their return
into the fold, their lack of milk is greater.

Though there are some indeed who, fearing harm,
stay near the shepherd, they are few in number—
to cowl them would require little cloth.

Now if my words are not too dim and distant,
if you have listened carefully to them,
if you can call to mind what has been said,

then part of what you wish to know is answered,
for you will see the splinters on the plant
and see what my correction meant: ‘Where one

may fatten well, if one does not stray off.'”