If it should happen . . . If this sacred poem—
this work so shared by heaven and by earth
that it has made me lean through these long years—

can ever overcome the cruelty
that bars me from the fair fold where I slept,
a lamb opposed to wolves that war on it,

by then with other voice, with other fleece,
I shall return as poet and put on,
at my baptismal font, the laurel crown;

for there I first found entry to that faith
which makes souls welcome unto God, and then,
for that faith, Peter garlanded my brow.

Then did a light move toward us from that sphere
from which emerged the first—the dear, the rare—
of those whom Christ had left to be His vicars;

and full of happiness, my lady said
to me: “Look, look—and see the baron whom,
below on earth, they visit in Galicia.”

As when a dove alights near its companion,
and each unto the other, murmuring
and circling, offers its affection, so

did I see both those great and glorious
princes give greeting to each other, praising
the banquet that is offered them on high.

But when their salutations were complete,
each stopped in silence coram me, and each
was so aflame, my vision felt defeat.

Then Beatrice said, smiling: “Famous life
by whom the generosity of our
basilica has been described, do let

matters of hope reecho at this height;
you can—for every time that Jesus favored
you three above the rest, you were the figure

of hope.” “Lift up your head, and be assured:
whatever comes here from the mortal world
has to be ripened in our radiance.”

The second fire offered me this comfort;
at which my eyes were lifted to the mountains
whose weight of light before had kept me bent.

“Because our Emperor, out of His grace,
has willed that you, before your death, may face
His nobles in the inmost of His halls,

so that, when you have seen this court in truth,
hope—which, below, spurs love of the true good—
in you and others may be comforted,

do tell what hope is, tell how it has blossomed
within your mind, and from what source it came
to you”—so did the second flame continue.

And she, compassionate, who was the guide
who led my feathered wings to such high flight,
did thus anticipate my own reply:

“There is no child of the Church Militant
who has more hope than he has, as is written
within the Sun whose rays reach all our ranks:

thus it is granted him to come from Egypt
into Jerusalem that he have vision
of it, before his term of warring ends.

The other two points of your question, which
were not asked so that you may know, but that
he may report how much you prize this virtue,

I leave to him; he will not find them hard
or cause for arrogance; as you have asked,
let him reply, and God’s grace help his task.”

As a disciple answering his master,
prepared and willing in what he knows well,
that his proficiency may be revealed,

I said: “Hope is the certain expectation
of future glory; it is the result
of God’s grace and of merit we have earned.

This light has come to me from many stars;
but he who first instilled it in my heart
was the chief singer of the Sovereign Guide.

‘May those’—he says within his theody—
‘who know Your name, put hope in You’; and if
one has my faith, can he not know God’s name?

And just as he instilled, you then instilled
with your Epistle, so that I am full
and rain again your rain on other souls.”

While I was speaking, in the living heart
of that soul—flame there came a trembling flash,
sudden, repeated, just as lightning cracks.

Then it breathed forth: “The love with which I still
burn for the virtue that was mine until
the palm and my departure from the field,

would have me breathe again to you who take
such joy in hope; and I should welcome words
that tell what hope has promised unto you.”

And I: “The new and ancient Scriptures set
the mark for souls whom God befriends; for me,
that mark means what is promised us by hope.

Isaiah says that all of the elect
shall wear a double garment in their land:
and their land is this sweet life of the blessed.

And where your brother treats of those white robes,
he has—with words direct and evident—
made clear to us Isaiah’s revelation.”

At first, as soon as I had finished speaking,
“Sperent in te” was heard above us, all
the circling garlands answering this call.

And then, among those souls, one light became
so bright that, if the Crab had one such crystal,
winter would have a month of one long day.

And as a happy maiden rises and
enters the dance to honor the new bride—
and not through vanity or other failing—

so did I see that splendor, brightening,
approach those two flames dancing in a ring
to music suited to their burning love.

And there it joined the singing and the circling,
on which my lady kept her eyes intent,
just like a bride, silent and motionless.

“This soul is he who lay upon the breast
of Christ our Pelican, and he was asked
from on the Cross to serve in the great task.”

So spoke my lady; but her gaze was not
to be diverted from its steadfastness,
not after or before her words were said.

Even as he who squints and strains to see
the sun somewhat eclipsed and, as he tries
to see, becomes sightless, just so did I

in my attempt to watch the latest flame,
until these words were said: “Why do you daze
yourself to see what here can have no place?

On earth my body now is earth and shall
be there together with the rest until
our number equals the eternal purpose.

Only those two lights that ascended wear
their double garment in this blessed cloister.
And carry this report back to your world.”

When he began to speak, the flaming circle
had stopped its dance; so, too, its song had ceased—
that gentle mingling of their threefold breath—

even as when, avoiding danger or
simply to rest, the oars that strike the water,
together halt when rowers hear a whistle.

Ah, how disturbed I was within my mind,
when I turned round to look at Beatrice,
on finding that I could not see, though I

was close to her, and in the world of gladness!