As long as both Latona’s children take
(when, covered by the Ram and Scales, they make
their belt of the horizon at the same

moment) to pass from equilibrium—
the zenith held in balance—to that state
where, changing hemispheres, each leaves that belt,

so long did Beatrice, a smile upon
her face, keep silent, even as she gazed
intently at the Point that overwhelmed me.

Then she began: “I tell—not ask—what you
now want to hear, for I have seen it there
where, in one point, all whens and ubis end.

Not to acquire new goodness for Himself—
which cannot be—but that his splendor might,
as it shines back to Him, declare ‘Subsisto,’

in His eternity outside of time,
beyond all other borders, as pleased Him,
Eternal Love opened into new loves.

Nor did he lie, before this, as if languid;
there was no after, no before—they were
not there until God moved upon these waters.

Then form and matter, either separately
or in mixed state, emerged as flawless being,
as from a three—stringed bow, three arrows spring.

And as a ray shines into amber, crystal,
or glass, so that there is no interval
between its coming and its lighting all

so did the three—form, matter, and their union—
flash into being from the Lord with no
distinction in beginning: all at once.

Created with the substances were order
and pattern; at the summit of the world
were those in whom pure act had been produced;

and pure potentiality possessed
the lowest part; and in the middle, act
so joined potentiality that they

never disjoin. For you, Jerome has written
that the creation of the angels came
long centuries before all else was made;

but this, the truth I speak, is written by
scribes of the Holy Ghost—as you can find
if you look carefully—on many pages;

and reason, too, can see in part this truth,
for it would not admit that those who move
the heavens could, for so long, be without

their perfect task. Now you know where and when
and how these loving spirits were created:
with this, three flames of your desire are quenched.

Then, sooner than it takes to count to twenty,
a portion of the angels violently
disturbed the lowest of your elements.

The rest remained; and they, with such rejoicing,
began the office you can see, that they
never desert their circling contemplation.

The fall had its beginning in the cursed
pride of the one you saw, held in constraint
by all of the world’s weights. Those whom you see

in Heaven here were modestly aware
that they were ready for intelligence
so vast, because of that Good which had made them:

through this, their vision was exalted with
illuminating grace and with their merit,
so that their will is constant and intact.

I would not have you doubt, but have you know
surely that there is merit in receiving
grace, measured by the longing to receive it.

By now, if you have taken in my words,
you need no other aid to contemplate
much in regard to this consistory.

But since on earth, throughout your schools, they teach
that it is in the nature of the angels
to understand, to recollect, to will,

I shall say more, so that you may see clearly
the truth that, there below, has been confused
by teaching that is so ambiguous.

These beings, since they first were gladdened by
the face of God, from which no thing is hidden,
have never turned their vision from that face,

so that their sight is never intercepted
by a new object, and they have no need
to recollect an interrupted concept.

So that, below, though not asleep, men dream,
speaking in good faith or in bad—the last,
however, merits greater blame and shame.

Below, you do not follow one sole path
as you philosophize—your love of show
and thought of it so carry you astray!

Yet even love of show is suffered here
with less disdain than the subordination
or the perversion of the Holy Scripture.

There, they devote no thought to how much blood
it costs to sow it in the world, to how
pleasing is he who—humbly—holds it fast.

Each one strives for display, elaborates
his own inventions; preachers speak at length
of these—meanwhile the Gospels do not speak.

One says that, to prevent the sun from reaching
below, the moon—when Christ was crucified—
moved back along the zodiac, so as

to interpose itself; who says so, lies—
for sunlight hid itself; not only Jews,
but Spaniards, Indians, too, saw that eclipse.

Such fables, shouted through the year from pulpits—
some here, some there—outnumber even all
the Lapos and the Bindos Florence has;

so that the wretched sheep, in ignorance,
return from pasture, having fed on wind—
but to be blind to harm does not excuse them.

Christ did not say to his first company:
‘Go, and preach idle stories to the world’;
but he gave them the teaching that is truth,

and truth alone was sounded when they spoke;
and thus, to battle to enkindle faith,
the Gospels served them as both shield and lance.

But now men go to preach with jests and jeers,
and just as long as they can raise a laugh,
the cowl puffs up, and nothing more is asked.

But such a bird nests in that cowl, that if
the people saw it, they would recognize
as lies the pardons in which they confide—

pardons through which the world’s credulity
increases so, that people throng to every
indulgence backed by no authority;

and this allows the Antonines to fatten
their pigs, and others, too, more piggish still,
who pay with counterfeit, illegal tender.

But since we have digressed enough, turn back
your eyes now to the way that is direct;
our time is short—so, too, must be our path.

The number of these angels is so great
that there has never been a mortal speech
or mortal thought that named a sum so steep;

and if you look at that which is revealed
by Daniel, you will see that, while he mentions
thousands, he gives no number with precision.

The First Light reaches them in ways as many
as are the angels to which It conjoins
Itself, as It illumines all of them;

and this is why (because affection follows
the act of knowledge) the intensity
of love’s sweetness appears unequally.

By now you see the height, you see the breadth,
of the Eternal Goodness: It has made
so many mirrors, which divide Its light,

but, as before, Its own Self still is One.”